
================================================================================
FILE: 22RMI57 Module 1 Notes.pdf
================================================================================

--- Page 1 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 1 of 16 
 Module -1 Research Methodology and Literature Survey ( 5 hours)  
Research Methodology:  Meaning, Objectives, Types of research , Method versus methodology, 
Research process, Criteria of good research.   
Literature Survey, Literature Review:  Introduction, process, databases and management tools. 
Identifying gap areas from literature review. Plagiarism: Introduction, tools for detection, 
avoiding plagiarism. Illustrations.  
 
1.1 Research Methodology  
1.1.1 Meaning  of Research  
Research in common parlance refers to a search for knowledge. One can also define research as  a 
scientific and systematic search for pertinent information on a specific topic. In fact, research is an  art 
of scientific investigation. The Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English lays down the  
meaning of research as “ a careful investigation or inquiry specially through search for new facts in 
any branch of knowledge”.   Redman and Mory define research as a “ systematized effort to gain new 
knowledge ”.  Some people consider research as a movement, a movement from the known to  the 
unknown. It is actually a voyage of discovery. We all possess the vital instinct of inquisitiveness  for, 
when the unknown confronts us, we wonder, and our inquisitiveness makes us  probe and attain  full and 
fuller understanding of the unknown. This inquisitiveness is the mother of all knowledge and  the 
method, which man employs for obtaining the knowledge of whatever the unknown, can be  termed as  
Research is, thus, an original cont ribution to the existing stock of knowledge making for its 
advancement . It is the pursuit  of truth with the help of study, observation, comparison  and experiment. 
In short, the search for knowledge through objective and systematic method of  finding solutio n to a 
problem is research. The systematic approach concerning generalisation and the  formulation of a theory 
is also research. As such the term ‘research’ refers to the systematic method consisting of enunciating 
the problem, formulating a hypothesis, col lecting the facts or data, analysing  the facts and reaching 
certain conclusions either in the form of solutions(s) towards the concerned  problem or in certain 
generalisations for some theoretical formulation.  
1.1.2 Objectives of Research  
The purpose of research is to discover answers to questions through the application of scientific  
procedures. The main aim of research is to find out the truth which is hidden and which has not been  
discovered as yet. Though each research study has its own spe cific purpose, we may think of  research 
objectives as falling into a number of following broad groupings:  
1. To gain familiarity with a phenomenon or to achieve new insights into it (studies with this  object in 
view are termed as exploratory or formulative  research studies);  
2. To portray accurately the characteristics of a particular individual, situation or a group  (studies with 
this object in view are known as descriptive research studies);  
3. To determine the frequency with which something occurs or wit h which it is associated  with 
something else (studies with this object in view are known as diagnostic research  studies);  
4. To test a hypothesis of a causal relationship between variables (such studies are known as  hypothesis -
testing research studies).  
1.1.3 Types of Research  
The basic types of research are as follows:  
(i) Descriptive vs. Analytical:  Descriptive research  includes surveys and fact -finding enquiries  of 
different kinds. The major purpose of descriptive research is description of the state of  affairs as it exists 
at present. In descriptive research, the researcher seeks to measure such items as, for example,  frequency 
of shopping, preferences of people, or similar data. It also includes  attempts by researchers to discover 

--- Page 2 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 2 of 16 
 causes even w hen they cannot control the  variables. The methods of research utilized in descriptive 
research are survey methods of  all kinds, including comparative and correlational methods. In analytical 
research, on the  other hand, the researcher has to use facts or information already available and analyse  
these to make a critical evaluation of the material.  
(ii). Applied vs. Fundamental:  Research can either be applied (or action) research or  fundamental (to 
basic or pure) research. Applied research  aims at finding a  solution for an  immediate problem facing a 
society or an industrial/business organisation, whereas fundamental research  is mainly concerned with 
generalisations and with the formulation of a theory.  “Gathering knowledge for knowledge’s sake is 
termed ‘pur e’ or ‘basic’ research ”. Research  concerning some natural phenomenon or relating to pure 
mathematics are examples of  fundamental research. Similarly, research studies, concerning human 
behaviour carried on  with a view to make generalisations about human behaviour, are also examples of  
fundamental research, but research aimed at certain conclusions (say, a solution) facing a  concrete social 
or business problem is an example of applied research. Thus, the  central aim of applied research is to 
discover  a solution for some pressing practical problem,  whereas basic research is directed towards 
finding information that has a broad base of  applications and thus, adds to the already existing organized 
body of scientific knowledge.  
(iii) Quantitative vs. Qual itative:  Quantitative research  is based on the measurement of quantity  or 
amount. It is applicable to phenomena that can be expressed in terms of quantity.  Qualitative research , 
on the other hand, is concerned with qualitative phenomenon, i.e.,  phenomena r elating to or involving 
quality or kind. For instance, when we are interested in  investigating the reasons for human behaviour 
(i.e., why people think or do certain things),  we quite often talk of ‘Motivation Research’, an important 
type of qualitative res earch.  
 (iv). Conceptual vs. Empirical : Conceptual research  is that related to some abstract idea(s) or  theory. 
It is generally used by philosophers and thinkers to develop new concepts or to  reinterpret existing ones. 
On the other hand, empirical research  relies on experience or  observation alone, often without due 
regard for system and theory. It is data -based research,  coming up with conclusions which are capable 
of being verified by observation or experiment.  We can also call it as experimental type of research.  
(v) Some Other Types of Research:  All other types of research are variations of one or more  of the 
above stated approaches, based on either the purpose of research, or the time  required to accomplish 
research, on the environment in which research is done, or on the  basis of some other similar factor. 
Form the point of view of time, we can think of research  either as one-time research or longitudinal 
research . In the former case the research is  confined to  a single time -period, whereas in the latter case 
the research is carried on over  several time -periods. Research can be field-setting research or laboratory 
research or  simulation research , depending upon the environment in which it is to be carried out.  
Research can as well be understood as clinical or diagnostic research . Such research  follows  case-study 
methods or in-depth  approaches to reach the basic causal relations.. The research may be exploratory  or 
it may be formalized. The objective of exploratory research is the development of  hypotheses rather 
than their testing, whereas formalized research studies are those with  substantial structure and with 
specific hypotheses to be tested. Historical research is that  which utilizes historical sourc es like 
documents, remains, etc. to study events or ideas of  the past, including the philosophy of persons and 
groups at any remote point of time. Research  can also be classified as conclusion -oriented and decision -
oriented. While doing conclusion -oriented  research, a researcher is free to pick up a problem, redesign 
the enquiry as he  proceeds and is prepared to conceptualize as he wishes. Decision -oriented research  is 
always for the need of a decision maker and the researcher in this case is not free to  embark upon 
research according to his own inclination. Operations research is an example  of decision -oriented  

--- Page 3 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 3 of 16 
 research since it is a scientific method of providing executive departments  with a quantitative basis for 
decisions regarding operations under their  control.  
1.1.3 Research Methods versus Research Methodology  
Research methods may be understood as all those methods/techniques that are used  for conduction of 
research. Research methods or techniques , thus, refer to the methods the researchers  use in performing 
research operations . In other words, all those methods which are used by the  researcher during the 
course of studying his research problem are termed as research methods.  
Since the object of research, particularly the applied research, it to arr ive at a solution for a given  
problem, the available data and the unknown aspects of the problem have to be related to each other  to 
make a solution possible. Keeping this in view, research methods can be put into the following  three 
groups:  
1. In the first group we include those methods which are concerned with the collection of  
data. These methods will be used where the data already available are not sufficient to  
arrive at the required solution;  
2. The second group consists of those statistical techn iques which are used for establishing  
relationships between the data and the unknowns;  
3. The third group consists of those methods which are used to evaluate the accuracy of 
the results obtained.  
Research methods falling in the above stated last two group s are generally taken as the analytical  tools 
of research.  
Research methodology is a way to systematically solve the research problem. It may be  understood as a 
science of studying how research is done scientifically. In it we study the various  steps that are generally 
adopted by a researcher in studying his research problem along with the logic  behind them. It is 
necessary for the researcher to know not only the research methods  but also the methodology.  
Research methodology has many dimensions  and re search methods do constitute a part of the research 
methodology. The scope of research  methodology is wider than that of research methods. Thus, when 
we talk of research methodology  we not only talk of the research methods but also consider the logic 
behin d the methods we use  in the context of our research study and explain why we are using a particular 
method or  technique and why we are not using others so that research results are capable of being  
evaluated either by the researcher himself or by others . Why a research study has been undertaken,  how 
the research problem has been defined, in what way and why the hypothesis has been formulated,  what 
data have been collected and what particular method has been adopted, why particular technique  of 
analysing dat a has been used and a host of similar other questions are usually answered when we  talk 
of research methodology concerning a research problem or study.  
1.1.4 Research Process  
Research process consists of series of actions or  steps necessary to effectively carry out research and the 
desired sequencing of these steps. The  chart shown in Figure 1.1 well illustrates a research process.  
The following order concerning various steps provides a useful procedural guideline  regarding the 
research process:  (1) formulating the research problem; (2) extensive literature survey;  (3) developing 
the hypothesis; (4) preparing the research design; (5) determining sample design;  (6) collecting the data; 
(7) execution of the project; (8) analysis of data; (9) hypoth esis testing;  (10) generalisations and 
interpretation, and (11) preparation of the report or presentation of the results,  i.e., formal write -up of 
conclusions reached.  
A brief description of the above stated steps will be helpful.  

--- Page 4 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 4 of 16 
 1. Formulating the resear ch problem:  There are two types of research problems, viz., those  which 
relate to states of nature and those which relate to relationships between variables. At the  very outset the 
researcher must single out the problem he wants to study . The formulation o f a general topic into a 
specific research  problem, constitutes the first step in a scientific enquiry. Essentially two steps are 
involved in  formulating the research problem, viz., understanding the problem thoroughly, and 
rephrasing the  same into meaning ful terms from an analytical point of view.  
2. Extensive literature survey:  Once the problem is formulated, a brief summary of it should be  written 
down. At this juncture the researcher should undertake extensive literature survey connected with the  
proble m. For this purpose, the abstracting and indexing journals and published or unpublished  
bibliographies are the first place to go to. Academic journals, conference proceedings, government  
reports, books etc., must be tapped depending on the nature of the problem. In this process, it should  be 
remembered that one source will lead to another. The earlier studies, if any, which are similar to  the 
study in hand should be carefully studied. A good library will be a great help to the researcher at  this 
stage.  
3. Development of working hypotheses:  After extensive literature survey, researcher should  state in 
clear terms the working hypothesis or hypotheses. Working hypothesis is tentative assumption  made in 
order to draw out and test its logical or empirical conse quences. As such the manner in  which research 
hypotheses are developed is particularly important since they provide the focal point  for research. They 
also affect the manner in which tests must be conducted in the analysis of data  and indirectly the qualit y 
of data which is required for the analysis.  
4. Preparing the research design:  The research problem having been formulated in clear cut  terms, 
the researcher will be required to prepare a research design, i.e., he will have to state the  conceptual 
struct ure within which research would be conducted. The preparation of such a design  facilitates 
research to be as efficient as possible yielding maximal information. In other words, the  function of 
research design is to provide for the collection of relevant ev idence with minimal expenditure  of effort, 
time and money.  
The preparation of the research design, appropriate for a particular research problem, involves  usually 
the consideration of the following:  
(i) the means of obtaining the information;  
(ii) the ava ilability and skills of the researcher and his staff (if any);  
(iii) explanation of the way in which selected means of obtaining information will be organised  
and the reasoning leading to the selection;  
(iv) the time available for research; and  
(v) the cost factor relating to research, i.e., the finance available for the purpose.  
5. Determining sample design:  The researcher must decide the way of selecting a sample or what is 
popularly known as the  sample design. In other words, a sample design is a definite plan determined 
before any data are  actually collected for obtaining a sample from a given population. Thus, the plan to 
select 12 of a  city’s 200 drugstores in a certain way constitutes a sample design. Samples can be either 
probability  samples o r non -probability samples.  
6. Collecting the data:  In dealing with any real-life problem it is often found that data at hand are  
inadequate, and hence, it becomes necessary to collect data that are appropriate. There are several  ways 
of collecting the app ropriate data which differ considerably in context of money costs, time and  other 
resources at the disposal of the researcher.  

--- Page 5 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 5 of 16 
 Primary data can be collected either through experiment or through survey. If the researcher  conducts 
an experiment, he observes some quantitative measurements, or the data, with the help of  which he 
examines the truth contained in his hypothesis. But in the case of a survey, data can be  collected by 
observations, through personal interviews, telephonic interviews, by mailing questi onnaires etc.  
7. Execution of the project:  Execution of the project is a very important step in the research  process. 
If the execution of the project proceeds on correct lines, the data to be collected would be  adequate and 
dependable. The researcher shou ld see that the project is executed in a systematic  manner and in time. 
If the survey is to be conducted by means of structured questionnaires, data can  be readily machine -
processed. In such a situation, questions as well as the possible answers may be  coded. If the data are to 
be collected through interviewers, arrangements should be made for proper  selection and training of the 
interviewers.  
8. Analysis of data:  After the data have been collected, the researcher turns to the task of analysing  
them. Th e analysis of data requires a number of closely related operations such as establishment of  
categories, the application of these categories to raw data through coding, tabulation and then drawing  
statistical inferences  
Tabulation is a part of the technical  procedure wherein the classified data are put in the form of  tables. 
The mechanical devices can be made use of at this juncture. A great deal of data, especially  in large 
inquiries, is tabulated by computers. Computers not only save time but also make it possible to  study 
large number of variables affecting a problem simultaneously.  
Analysis work after tabulation is generally based on the computation of various percentages,  
coefficients, etc., by applying various well-defined  statistical formulae. In the p rocess of analysis,  
relationships or differences supporting or conflicting with original or new hypotheses should be 
subjected  to tests of significance to determine with what validity data can be said to indicate any 
conclusion(s).  
9. Hypothesis -testing : After analysing the data as stated above, the researcher is in a position to  test the 
hypotheses, if any, he had formulated earlier. Do the facts support the hypotheses or they  happen to be 
contrary? This is the usual question which should be answered while  testing hypotheses.  
Various tests, such as Chi square test, t -test, F -test, have been developed by statisticians for the  purpose. 
The hypotheses may be tested through the use of one or more of such tests, depending upon  the nature 
and object of research i nquiry. Hypothesis -testing will result in either accepting the hypothesis  or in 
rejecting it. If the researcher had no hypotheses to start with, generalisations established on the  basis of 
data may be stated as hypotheses to be tested by subsequent researc hes in times to come.  
10. Generalisations and interpretation:  If a hypothesis is tested and upheld several times, it may  be 
possible for the researcher to arrive at generalisation, i.e., to build a theory. As a matter of fact,  the real 
value of research li es in its ability to arrive at certain generalisations. If the researcher had no  hypothesis 
to start with, he might seek to explain his findings on the basis of some theory. It is known  as 
interpretation. The process of interpretation may quite often trigger off new questions which in  turn may 
lead to further researches.  
11. Preparation of the report or the thesis:  Finally, the researcher has to prepare the report of  what 
has been done by him. Writing of report must be done with great care keeping in v iew the  following:  
1. The layout of the report should be as follows: (i) the preliminary pages; (ii) the main text,  and (iii) the 
end matter.  
 
 

--- Page 6 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 6 of 16 
  
 
 
 
Fig. 1.1 Research Process  
 


--- Page 7 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 7 of 16 
 1.1.5 Criteria of Good Research  
Whatever may be the types of research works and studies, one thing that is important is that they all  
meet on the common ground of scientific method employed by them. One expects scientific research  to 
satisfy the following criteria . 
1. The purpose of the research should be clearly defined and common concepts be used.   
2. The research procedure used should be described in sufficient detail to permit another  researcher to 
repeat the  research for further advancement, keeping the continuity of what  has already been attained.  
3. The procedural design of the research should be carefully planned to yield results that are  as objective 
as possible.  
4. The researcher should report with complete frankness, flaws in procedural design and  estimate their 
effects upon the findings.  
5. The analysis of data should be sufficiently adequate to reveal its significance and the  methods of 
analysis used should be appropriate. The validity and reliabi lity of the data  should be checked carefully.  
6. Conclusions should be confined to those justified by the data of the research and limited to  those for 
which the data provide an adequate basis.  
7. Greater confidence in research is warranted if the research er is experienced, has a good  reputation in 
research and is a person of integrity.  
1.2 Literature Review  (LR)  
1.2.1 Introduction  
Literature Review (LR) can be defined in many ways.  
“Systematic and organized compilation and critical study of related body of knowledge is literature 
survey”  
“A literature review surveys books, scholarly articles, and any other source, relevant to a particular issue, 
area of research, or theory, and by 8 0 doing Provides a description, summary, and critical evaluation of 
these works in relation to the research problem being investigated.”  
Types of Sources  
• Primary sources : The original thesis or data collected and presented by a researcher. E.g.: research 
papers in journals, patents, Ph D thesis etc.  
• Secondary sources : The original data and studies of an original stud quoted or collected by another 
author e.g. review papers . 
• Tertiary sources : The primary and secondary data collected and presented b y different 
scientists/authors e.g. edited books, news, blogs, and other web resources.  
Each and every source has its own merits and demerits. Choose the source wisely. The selection of a 
type of source depend upon the subject, scope and level of the stud y.  
Key Features of Literature Review  
• Size (depending on the subject/ level of research):  Size means what should be the length and 
breadth of the content to be collected. It depends on the subject, type of research, scope of research 
and level of research.   
• Quality : Search/ refer the quality articles from quality sources/ journals/ publishers/ books. Wrong 
methods can not lead to right research. Substandard articles, if you will refer, you can not expect a 
good research. Refer the good quality source. It is  utmost important. Quality articles only can lead 
to reproducible results.  

--- Page 8 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 8 of 16 
 • Versatility : Versatility means including all the types of resources not just one, Your LR must 
contain a good mix of review, research, patents, books, hews, meta -analysis, regulato ry guidelines, 
historical articles/ studies, geographical distribution of compiled studies etc.  
• Up-to-date:  Referring to the current literature plays an important role in LS. References must be 
recent developments in the field.   
• Do not skip the historica l or pioneer studies / articles of the subject/topic Though in one hand we 
are saying that only current references should be Cited. But we must not avoid the historical or 
pioneer reference.  
• Completeness : Complete the LR with respect to the scope of study (topics, subtopics, allied topics 
etc) with due focus.  
• Be critical : Include the studies which may not favour your tentative hypothesis also. You must be 
self-critical. You planned or trying to hypothesize a thing. You are collecting the supporting 
evidenc e. But you must not skip the things which are against your hypothesis or any other 
contradictory/ controversial things. It will be an unbiased ground of LR.  
• Discuss with the supervisor/ mentor/ team members/ collaborators  for any doubt/ help. There 
must be a good tune in between.  
1.2.2 Literature  Review  Process  
Step 1: Select a topic:   Select a topic you can manage in the time frame you have to complete your 
project.  Establish your research questions and organize your literature into logical categories around the 
subject/ topic areas of your questions. Your research questions must be s pecific enough to guide you to 
the relevant literature.  
Make sure you understand the concept of ‘broader’ and ‘narrower’ terms.  The narrower your topic, the 
easier it will be to limit the number of sources you need to read in order to get a good survey of  the 
literature.  
Step 2: Identify the most relevant sources on your topic:  Use a variety of resources - locate books, 
journals, and documents that contain useful information and ideas on your topic.  Internet sites, theses 
& dissertations, conference paper s, ePrints and government or industry reports can also be included.  
Do not rely solely on electronic full -text material which is more easily available. Reference sources such 
as dictionaries can assist in defining terminology, and encyclopedias  may provide useful introductions 
to your topic by experts in the field and will list key references.  
Step 3: Search and refine:  Search number of databases that provide full text access to articles, that 
allow you to refine your search to ‘pee r reviewed’ journals.  These are scholarly journals which go 
through a rigorous process of quality assessment by several researchers or subject specialists in the 
academic community before they are accepted for publication.  
Use the And, Or, Not operators,  Wildcards and Logical Brackets when searching in the databases.  For 
instance, you can use And to narrow your search while the operator OR expands your search.  Not, on 
the other hand, helps to exclude irrelevant information from your search results.  
Step  4: Read and Analyse:  Read the literatures and analyse them finding the answers to possible 
questions such as -  Are there gaps in the literature? Where has significant research taken place, and 
who has done it? Is there consensus or debate on this topic? Which methodological approaches work 
best? etc.  
Step 5: Write  the Literature  Review : You can organize the review in many ways; for example, you 
can center the review  historically  (how the topic has been dealt with over time); or center it on 

--- Page 9 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 9 of 16 
 the theoretical positions  surrounding your topic (those for a position vs. those against, for example); or 
you can focus on how each of your sources contributes to your understanding of your p roject.  
Your literature review should include:  
• an introduction  which explains how your review is organized.  
• a body  which contains the  headings  and subheadings  that provide a map to show the various 
perspectives of your argument. In other words the body con tains the evaluation of the materials 
you want to include on your topic.  
• a summary . 
1.2.3 Literature Review Databases  
Scopus  
Scopus is the subscription based one of the largest databases covering various subjects. It covers all 
types of peer reviewed resources like literature, scholarly article of journals, books, conference 
proceedings etc.  
Scopus is a multidisciplinary database and it covers sciences, technology, medical, biomedical, social 
sciences, humanities . It is updated daily 60  millio n records from more than 21500 journals by more than 
360 publishers.  
Web of Science (WoS)   
• Web of Science was previously known as Web of Knowledge. It is a Multidisciplinary database .  
• WoS  is s huge subscription -based scientific citation indexing service. It was originally produced 
by the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) and how it is maintained by Clarivate Analysis.  
• It searches conference papers, patent data, datasets and data studies, books etc.  
PubMed  
• PubMed is a free database covering citations and abstracts from the fields d medical, biomedical, 
health, Sciences (basic and applied — including pharmaceutical sciences), life sciences, 
behavioural sciences, chemical sciences, and bioengineering.  
• This free web resource is maintained by the National Centre for Biotechnology Information 
(NCBI) in U.S. National Library of Medicine.  
Other free databases  
• Google Scholar : Easily and freely available with advanced filters.  
• Director y of Open Access Journals: DOAJ (www.doaj.org)  
• DOAB (Directory of Open Access Books)  
• DOAR  (Directory of Open Access Repository)  
Indian Databases  
Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) Centre  
Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) Centre is a n autonomous Inter -University Centre of 
the University Grants Commission (UGC) of India. It helps in modernizing university libraries in India 
and connecting the with high speed network. It provides quality learning and literature database for 
students, te achers and researchers.  
This centre provides a huge variety of databases.  
• Information and Library network centre (founded by UGC)  
• SHODHGANGOTRI  
• SHODHGANGA  
• eSHODHSINDHU  
• ICSSR DATA SERVICE  
• INDCAT , VIDWAN; EXPERT DATABASE  

--- Page 10 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 10 of 16 
 1.2.4 Literature Management Tools  
Some functions that can be performed by  literature  management tools  for research:   
1. Create and store citations to efficiently generate an accurate bibliography:  Integrate with 
your word processing program to insert citations and change journal format; can use a variety of 
styles and journal formats   
2. Search the literature:  good  reference management tools for research  will recommend articles 
based on your library or written text; external search function   
3. Organize and store PDFs:  use folders and tags to organize the reference library; search for 
documents by author name, keywords, text, notes; highlight passages and annotate PDF files   
4. Foster collaboration:  allows you to share your library with colleagues   
5. Create mobility:  can sync references across multiple devices.  
Three Major Literature Management Tools are:  
1. EndNote:  The most powerful, and complex, of the commonly used  reference management 
software, EndNote is available in standalone (installed on your computer) and online versions. The 
desktop version is priced at $249.50 ($115.95 for a student license); the online version is free but 
lacks many features included in the desktop version.  
2. Mendeley:  Mendeley may be the most popular  reference management too l in research. It comes 
in free and premium (paid) versions and allows users to manage their references quickly and 
effectively.  
3. Zotero : Zotero is a free, open -sourced  reference management tool for research  that allows users 
to collect, save, and cite refe rences in one place.  
1.2.5 Author Metrics  
Author metrics are quantitative measures used to evaluate the scholarly impact, productivity, and 
influence of individual researchers within the academic community. These metrics provide insights into 
an author's p ublication output, citation impact, and collaboration patterns. Some commonly used author 
metrics include:  
h-index:  The h -index is a popular author -level metric that combines both productivity and citation 
impact. An author with an h -index of h has publish ed h papers that have each been cited at least h times.  
i10-index:  This index, introduced by Google Scholar, reflects the number of an author's publications 
that have received at least ten citations.  
Citation Count:  This metric simply counts the total number of citations an author's work has received. 
It gives an indication of the overall impact or visibility of the author's research.  
h-index Variants:  There are variants of the h -index, such as the g -index (which con siders highly cited 
papers) and the m -index (which accounts for an author's productivity over time).  
Collaboration Metrics:  Metrics related to collaboration, such as co -authorship networks or the number 
of co -authored publications, provide insights into an  author's collaborative efforts within the scholarly 
community.  
Altmetrics for Authors:  Similar to journal -level altmetrics, these metrics track the online attention 
received by an author's work through social media mentions, downloads, saves, and other on line 
activities.  
Author metrics are used by researchers, academic institutions, and funding agencies for various 
purposes, including evaluating researchers for tenure or promotion, assessing grant applications, 

--- Page 11 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 11 of 16 
 identifying potential collaborators, and unde rstanding an individual's contribution to their field. 
Evaluating an author's impact should involve a comprehensive assessment that considers qualitative 
aspects of their work alongside quantitative metrics.  
1.2.6 Journal Metrics  
Journal metrics are quantitative measures used to assess the impact, influence, quality, and reach of 
academic journals within the scholarly community. These metrics are essential tools for researchers, 
publishers, and institutions to evaluate the significance and performance  of scholarly publications. Some 
commonly used journal metrics include:  
Impact Factor (IF):  Impact Factor is one of the most well -known metrics. It measures the average 
number of citations received by articles published in a journal within a specific timef rame, typically 
calculated annually. The higher the impact factor, the more influential the journal is considered within 
its field.  
CiteScore:  Similar to the Impact Factor, CiteScore measures the average citations received per 
document over a specific peri od, usually a year. It is calculated by Scopus and may provide a broader 
view compared to Impact Factor, as it considers more document types.  
Eigenfactor Score:  This metric evaluates the overall importance of a journal in its field by considering 
the numbe r of incoming citations to the journal and the significance of the citing journals.  
Article Influence Score:  Introduced by Eigenfactor, it measures the average influence of a journal's 
articles over a five -year period, providing a more long -term view of a journal's impact.  
h-index of the journal:  This metric assesses both the productivity and impact of the articles published 
in a journal. A journal's h -index is determined by the number of articles it has published that have 
received at least the same number  of citations.  
Altmetrics:  These metrics take into account non -traditional indicators such as social media mentions, 
downloads, and other online activity to measure the reach and influence of research beyond citations.  
It's important to note that while jou rnal metrics provide valuable insights, they should be used cautiously 
and in conjunction with qualitative assessment, as they have limitations and may not fully represent the 
quality or significance of individual articles within a journal. Moreover, diffe rent disciplines and fields 
may have unique citation patterns, which can influence how these metrics are interpreted.  
1.3 Identifying gap areas from literature review  
1.3.1 Research gap 
When you read papers or books on topics of your interest, you may real ize there are some areas that 
have significant scope for more research but they have not been tapped by other researchers. In other 
words, no one has picked up or worked on these ideas. A research gap or a literature gap refers to such 
unexplored or undere xplored areas that have scope for further research.  
1.3.2 Different ways to identify the research gaps  
1. Look for inspiration in published literature  
Read books and articles on the topics that you like the most. This will not only help you understand the 
depth of work done by researchers in your field but also provide an opportunity to ask questions that 
can lead you to a research gap.  
You can ask yourself questions like:  
o What is the significance of this research to my work or the broader field?  
o How can this article help me formulate my research questions?  

--- Page 12 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 12 of 16 
 o Does the author’s argument require more clarification?  
o What issues or questions has the author not addressed?  
o Is there a different perspective that I can consider?  
o What other factors could have influenced the results?  
o Are the methods or procedures used outdated or no longer considered valid in your field?  
o  Is there scope for you to test the findings using more a current approach?  
While reading the research articles, one can fin d the research gaps in the directions or suggestions for 
further research given by the article authors. R eview papers help you to learn more about the 
developments and trends in research over the years in the area of your liking. This will help you get 
acquainted with the problems that have been researched upon in the past as well as trending queries on 
those topics that you find interesting.  
2. Seek help from your research advisor  
Discuss the issues and problems in your field with your research advisor to generate ideas for research. 
Articulating your ideas and knowing what others think and are working on may help you identify your 
study area or even identify mistakes in your approach. If you think a question would be interesting to 
work on, you can discuss  it with your advisor and get their suggestions.  
3. Use digital tools to seek out popular topics or most cited research papers  
To familiarize yourself with the trending queries in your field, you can use digital tools as they can save 
time and help you cast a wider net in your search for a research gap. Websites help to identify the most 
cited papers in a field along with the emerging branches, influential contributors, publications, and 
countries in that field can be immensely useful to know which topic s are considered important. You can 
also use  Google Trends  to learn more about the popular questions related to your research area. This 
will ease your search for an untapped area in your  research field.  
4.  Check the websites of influential journals  
The websites of prominent journals often have a section called ‘key concepts’ where experts in an area 
highlight the central ideas in that field.  Reading through this section can help you gain  a lot of insights 
and generate new ideas as well. Moreover, you should also look through the reference section of these 
papers as it can lead you to important resources on the topic.  
5. Make a note of your queries  
It is a good practice to note all the questions that cross your mind while reading any published literature. 
If possible, you should map the question to the resource it is based on. You can use tables, charts, 
pictures, or tools to maintain a record. This can help you in the long run when you are developing your 
idea into a research problem or even when writing your manuscript.  
6. Research each question  
Once you have a list of questions that could be explored, you must conduct thorough research on them. 
What does this mean? Read more about each  doubt or query that you have. Find out if other researchers 
have had similar questions and whether they have found answers to them. This will help you avoid 
duplication of work.  
While you finalize an unprecedented research idea, make sure you consider the  time frame available to 
complete the project as well as other important aspects such as the availability of funds, equipment, and 
infrastructure.  
 

--- Page 13 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 13 of 16 
 1.4 Ethics in research and publications  
1.4.1 Introduction:  Research Ethics is defined here to be the ethics of the planning, conduct, and 
reporting of research. It is clear that research ethics should include: Protections of human and animal 
subjects.  
The application of basic ethical concepts to research activiti es, such as the design and implementation 
of research, respect for society and others, the use of resources and research outputs, scientific 
misconduct, and research regulation, is what research ethics is all about.  
 
1.4.2 Importance of research ethics  :Both researchers and participants gain from following ethical 
norms and principles. To begin with, they aid in the promotion of research's broad goals, such as the 
pursuit of knowledge and the desire to avoid errors. Second, ethics encourage qualities such a s respect, 
trust, and accountability, which are essential for successful collaboration. Third, they play a vital role in 
holding researchers accountable to societies and communities, which increases public trust and support 
for research.  
For a variety of reasons, research ethics are critical. They foster research goals such as knowledge 
expansion. They believe in ideals like mutual respect and fairness, which are essential for collaborative 
work. Because scientific research relies on collaborati on between researchers and groups, this is critical.  
Ethics are the principles that guide us to make a positive impact through our decisions and actions. 
Ethics play an important role not only in our personal lives but also in business. We are all encourag ed 
to make ethical choices and apply ethics in all areas of our lives.  
1.4.3 Principles of research ethics  
Undeniably, researchers face several ethical requirements. Every researcher must meet the set 
institutional, federal and professional standards for c onducting research that involves human 
participants. The following are some of the general research ethics:  
Honesty – researchers should honestly report data, research methods, and procedures, results, and 
publication status. Never falsify, fabricate or mi srepresent data.  
Objectivity – always aim to avoid biases in experimental design, data analysis and interpretation, 
personal decisions, expert testimony, peer review and all other aspects of research.  
Integrity – do not act contrary to your promises and ag reements. Do your research with sincerity and  
endeavor for regularity of thought and action.  
Carefulness – avoid negligence and making careless errors. Ensure that you carefully and critically  
scrutinize your work as well as the work of your friends. It is  always good to keep the records for every 
research activity.  
Respecting intellectual property – always respect copyrights, patents and any other type of intellectual 
property. Never use unreleased data, methods or results without consent. Never plagiarize , and always 
give credit where it is due.  
Confidentiality – safeguard confidential information like personal information, military or trade 
secrets, and patient records. Never disclose any of this information without the necessary permission.  
 
1.5 Plagiarism  
1.5.1 Introduction  
Plagiarism is academic / literary theft (intentionally or unintentionally). Plagiarism occurs when 
someone uses other person’s language, ideas or any other type of text material, figure and graph which 
do not belong to common original knowledge without its acknowledgement.  

--- Page 14 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 14 of 16 
 According to the Merriam – Webster online dictionary, to “plagiarize” means:  
• “To steal and pass off (the ideas or words of another) as one’s own  
• To use (another’s production) without crediting the source  
• To commit literary theft  
• To present as new and original an idea or product derived from an existing source”  
Things to be d one –  
• You should not take or reproduce any theory, idea or any other study material of another person 
without acknowledgement.  
1.5.2 Plagiarism Detection Tools:  Plagiarism detection tools are software applications designed to 
identify instances of plagi arism or unoriginal content in written documents, research papers, essays, 
articles, and other forms of textual content. These tools employ various techniques to compare the 
submitted text against a vast database of existing content to find similarities or  matches. Here are some 
commonly used plagiarism detection tools and methods:  
Turnitin:  A widely used tool in educational institutions, Turnitin compares submitted papers against its 
extensive database and provides a similarity report highlighting areas th at match existing sources. It 
detects similarities in text and provides an originality score.  
Grammarly:  While primarily known as a grammar -checking tool, Grammarly also includes a 
plagiarism checker feature in its premium version. It scans text against a large database and flags 
potential instances of plagiarism.  
Copyscape:  Mainly used for web content, Copyscape checks for plagiarism by scanning the internet for 
duplicate content. It helps website owners and content creators identify unauthorized copies of  their 
content onlin e. 
Plagscan:  This tool compares submitted documents against online sources and proprietary databases to 
identify similarities and generate detailed reports highlighting potentially plagiarized content.  
Quetext:  Quetext is an online plag iarism detection tool that compares submitted text against a vast 
database to identify matching content and provides a similarity report.  
MOSS (Measure of Software Similarity):  Primarily used in programming and computer science, 
MOSS detects similarities i n source code. It's often employed in academic settings to identify code 
plagiarism.  
Manual Google Search:  While not a dedicated tool, using specific search techniques on search engines 
like Google by enclosing phrases in quotation marks or using advanced search operators (such as "site:") 
can help manually detect copied content from online sources.  
These tools typically use algorithms like fingerprinting, string matching, natural language processing 
(NLP), and other text comparison techniques to detect sim ilarities between the submitted content and 
existing texts. They generate reports highlighting matched sections and provide a percentage or score 
indicating the degree of similarity.  
It's important to note that while these tools are helpful in identifying potential instances of plagiarism, 
human judgment is crucial to interpret the results accurately. Not all matches signify plagiarism; some 
may be legitimate citations or common phrases. Therefore, manual review and contextual analysis are 
neces sary to determine the nature of detected similarities.  
 
 

--- Page 15 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 15 of 16 
 1.5.3 Avoiding Plagiarism  
Avoiding plagiarism involves properly crediting and acknowledging sources when using information, 
ideas, or language from other works. Here are several key practices to help prevent plagiarism:  
Cite Sources:  Whenever you use someone else's ideas, words, or data, cite the source. This includes 
direct quotes, paraphrases, summaries, and even ideas that are not common knowledge. Use the 
appropriate citation styl e (APA, MLA, Chicago, etc.) recommended by your institution or publisher.  
Understand Proper Paraphrasing:  When paraphrasing, rephrase the original text in your own words 
while retaining the meaning. Ensure that the structure and organization of the informa tion are different 
from the original.  
Use Quotations : When directly quoting a source, use quotation marks and provide the correct citation. 
This indicates that the exact words are from the original source.  
Manage References and Notes : Keep thorough notes o f all sources consulted during research. Record 
bibliographic information (author, title, publication date, etc.) to properly cite them later.  
Develop Your Own Ideas:  Focus on developing original thoughts and ideas backed by evidence and 
resea rch. Combine information from various sources to create new insights and interpretations.  
Give Credit for Common Knowledge : Information that is common knowledge or widely accepted 
facts (e.g., historical dates, scientific principles) doesn't require citation. However, if in doubt, it's better 
to cite the source.  
Use Plagiarism Detection Tools:  Before submitting your work, utilize plagiarism detection software 
or online tools to check for unintentional similarities with existing content.  
Seek Guidance:  If you're unsure a bout proper citation practices or how to use sources correctly, consult 
style guides, academic writing centers, or your instructors for guidance.  
Plan Ahead and Manage Time:  Procrastination can lead to rushed writing, increasing the likelihood 
of accidenta l plagiarism. Start your assignments early to have enough time for research, writing, and 
proper citation.  
Review and Edit:  Always review your work before submission. Check citations, references, and 
quotations to ensure accuracy and completeness.  
By follo wing these practices and maintaining academic integrity, one can effectively avoid plagiarism 
and properly acknowledge the intellectual contributions of others while presenting his/her own original 
work . 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 16 ---
Module 1: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangalur u (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 16 of 16 
 A. Short answer type questions  
1. State any two objectives of Research.  
2. Distinguish between qualitative and quantitative Research.  
3. What do you mean by Research Methods and Research Methodology?  
4. What do you understand by Sample Design in the Research Process?  
5. List any 4 criteria for good research.  
6. Give few examples of Tertiary Sources used in Literature Review.   
7. What do you mean by Impact factor of journals?  
8. Define h -index as author level metric.  
9. List principles of Research ethics.  
10. Name any 4 plagiarism detection tools.  
 
B. Descriptive answer type questions  
1. What do you mean by Research? Explain its importance in Engineering.  
2. Explain any 4 basic types of Research.  
3. Briefly describe the different steps involved in a research process  with a neat flowchart.  
4. Discuss the criteria for good Research.  
5. List and Explain the steps involved in the literature review process.  
6. Discuss the different ways used to identify the research gaps.  
7. Explain the importance and principles of Research E thics.  
8.  What do you mean by Plagiarism? Explain at least 5 key practices to help prevent plagiarism . 
 
C. Discussion type questions  
1. Use the research process steps to outline how you would carry out a study on the effectiveness of 
online learning platforms for engineering students during internships.  
2. Demonstrate how you would use reference management tools like Zotero or Mendeley to organize 
sources during a literature review on electric vehicle adoption in India.  
3. Differentiate betwe en basic and applied research using a real -world engineering example from 
your field of study.  
4. Analyze the reasons why researchers may unintentionally commit plagiarism, and propose 
strategies to mitigate this risk.  
5. Evaluate the quality of a given re search paper based on the criteria of good research (e.g., clarity, 
systematic approach, objectivity, etc.).  
6. Critically assess two different literature reviews on the same topic and argue which one is more 
effective and why.  
7. Design a research methodo logy framework for a project aimed at enhancing renewable energy 
usage in rural areas.  
8. Create an infographic or conceptual map that illustrates the differences between "method" and 
"methodology" with examples from engineering research.  
 
*** 
 
 


================================================================================
FILE: 22RMI57 Module 2 Notes.pdf
================================================================================

--- Page 1 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 1 of 17 
 Module -2 Technical Writing and Presentations (5 hours)  
Research Paper Writing:  Importance, steps of writing research papers, Contents of a research 
article, Illustrations.  
Thesis Writing:  Synopsis, Introduction, Literature review, Aim and Objectives, Methodology, 
Time frame, Results and discussions, Conclusions. Illustrations.  
Research Proposal Writing:  Preliminary requirements for proposal writing, Standard heads in 
research proposal. Illustrations.  
 
2.1 Research Paper Writing  
2.1.1 Importance of Research Paper Writing  
A research article is a written document which contains the critical presentations of the results of an 
original research and is published in peer reviewed scholarly journal.  
Writing research papers serves several crucial purposes across various academic and professional fields. 
Here are some key reasons why writing research papers is important:  
(i). Contribution to Knowledge:  Research papers contribute to the existing body of knowledge in a 
particular field. They allow researchers to share their findings,  insights, and discoveries, thereby 
advancing the understanding of a subject.  
(ii). Critical Thinking and Problem -Solving:  The process of researching and writing a paper 
encourages critical thinking. It involves analyzing information, synthesizing ideas, a nd drawing 
conclusions, which are essential skills for problem -solving in academia and the workforce.  
(iii). Documentation of Findings:  Research papers document the methods, results, and conclusions of 
a study. This documentation provides a reference for o ther researchers, allowing them to replicate 
experiments or build upon previous work.  
(iv). Communication Skills:  Writing research papers hones communication skills. Researchers need to 
articulate their ideas clearly and effectively to convey complex information to a broader audience.  
(v). Academic Recognition and Career Advancement:  Publishing research papers is oft en a 
requirement for academic advancement. It helps researchers gain recognition within their field and can 
lead to opportunities for grants, collaborations, promotions, and tenure.  
(vi). Peer Review and Quality Assurance:  Publishing papers involves peer r eview, where experts in 
the field evaluate the research for its quality, accuracy, and contribution. This process ensures the 
credibility and validity of the research.  
(vii). Impact and Influence:  Well -written and impactful research papers can influence po licies, 
practices, and further research in a particular area. They can shape discussions, inspire new ideas, and 
drive innovation.  
(viii). Education and Learning Process:  Writing research papers is an integral part of the educational 
process. It allows stu dents to delve deep into a subject, fostering a deeper understanding and appreciation 
for the research process itself.  
(ix). Documentation and Preservation of Knowledge:  Research papers serve as a permanent record 
of scholarly work. They contribute to the preservation of knowledge for future generations of researchers 
and students.  

--- Page 2 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 2 of 17 
 (x). Personal and Intellectual Growth:  Engaging in research and writing papers is intellectually 
stimulating. It challenges individuals to expand their knowledge, explore new con cepts, and develop 
their abilities as researchers and scholars.  
In summary, writing research papers plays a crucial role in advancing knowledge, fostering critical 
thinking skills, communicating ideas effectively, and contributing to the growth and develop ment of 
individuals and their respective fields of study.  
2.1.2 Steps of Writing Research Papers  
The steps in writing the research papers are illustrated in the following figure.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure. Steps in Writing Research Papers  
 
Step 1 Plan:  Planning the paper writing shall be in terms of Time, Studies to be included, Language , 
Author’s Name and Outline of the Paper.  
Time  - It is suggested to start early and do not wait up to the end of your entire research work . 
Studies to be included  – Plan the preliminary promising studies which yielded good and novel results . 
Do not cut the work intentionally in smaller pieces of work  in order to make more number of papers.  
Language - English is the most widespread language with respect to readership in international scientific 
communication  and shall be the first choice while writing research papers.  
Author’s Name  - Authorship denotes an “intellectual contribution” to the work, and that an author should 
be able to explain and def end the work. At this stage itself, it is better to decide on the authorship  
numbers and their sequence in the research paper.  
Outline of the Paper - Plan the outline of your article as per the scope and type of your article. One 
possible could be:  
• Body of  knowledge (LR),  
• Rational,  
• Aim/objectives,  
• Methods, and  
• Results & Discussion  
Step 2: Target Journal:  For targeting your manuscript /research article  to a suitable journal one must 
take care of the following points.  
• Match your topic with scope of journal  
• Refer Databases for targeting  
• Reputation (IF or other journal metrics: Impact, speed and reach)  
• Time  
• Availability (online/ offline)  Plan  Target Journal  Write First Draft  
Revise and 
Format  Final Check  Submission and 
Post Submission  

--- Page 3 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 3 of 17 
 • Indexing  
• Format (See the guidelines for authors and general submiss ion guidelines)  
• Article Processing Charges  
Step 3: Write the First Draft:  While preparing the first draft, one shall maintain a systemic flow in 
writing and presenting information  following the journal guidelines. Avoiding grammatical mistake and 
plagia rism is very crucial at this stage. Reader friendliness and clarity brings more value to the first 
draft . Focus shall be given at every section of the article.  
Step 4: Revision:  In revision, make major alterations to make your manuscript attractive and easy to 
read. Fill in gaps. Correct flaws in logic restructure the document to present the material in most logical 
order.  
Polish the style, refine the text. Focus on correct gram mar and spelling polish the style, refine the text 
and focus on correct grammar and spelling. Ensure cohesion and coherence. Format the document and 
page setting as recommended by the journal.  
Revision is an ongoing process. The most practiced strategy is  to write out an initial draft and leave it 
for a day. Then again come back to it and revise and always be ready for multiple revisions.  
Step 5: Final Check:  Final check must be done by all co -authors. Co -authors should check the final 
draft to make sure i t satisfies their expectations. Check the overall appearance , identify any break in 
inconsistency page breaks etc. Check compliant to formatting guidelines.  
Check table and figure number and their text citation. Finalize abstract and check the accuracy of  the 
abstract. Lastly finalize the title and see the accuracy alphabet by alphabet.  
Step 6: Submission and Post Submission:  
Submission : This step involves preparing a c over letter (for Journal Submission) , Submission to 
Journals/Conferences and awaiting the Review/Feedback . 
Post Submission  includes Response to Reviewers (if applicable) , Revision and Resubmission , 
Acceptance and Publication , Proofreading and Final Checks , Publication and Dissemination . 
 
2.1.3 Contents of a Research Article  
The most commonly used style of writing Research Article is IMRaD style of writing. IMRaD stands 
for Introduction, Methods, Results, and Discussion, which is a common structure used in scientific and 
academic writing, e specially for research papers and articles. A brief description of each section in the 
IMRaD format  is as follows:  
 
a. Introduction : The Introduction section sets the stage for the research paper by providing context, 
background information, and the resear ch problem or question.  It includes a brief overview of the topic, 
the significance of the study, and the objectives or hypotheses.  The introduction ends with a clear and 
concise statement of the research aim or the purpose of the study, often culminating in the presentation 
of the research question or the hypothesis.  
b. Methods:  The Methods section details the methodology used to conduct the research.  It describes 
the research design, materials, and methods employed in data collection or experimentation.  This section 
includes information on the participants or subjects (if applicable), the procedures followed, data 

--- Page 4 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 4 of 17 
 collection techniques, and any tools or instruments used.  It should be written in a way that another 
researcher could replicate the study based on the information provided.  
c. Results:  The Results section presents the findings obtained from the research.  It includes raw data, 
statistical analyses, graphs, tables, and any other forms of data representation to illustrate the outcomes 
of the study.  This section focuses on presenting the results objectively without interpretation or 
discussion of their implications.  
d. Discussion:  The Discussion section interprets and explains the significance of the results.  It analyzes 
the findings in the con text of the research question or hypothesis stated in the introduction.  The 
discussion compares the results to previous research, identifies limitations, and discusses the 
implications, applications, and potential future directions for further research.  This section often 
concludes by summarizing the main findings and their broader implications in the field.  
Following the IMRaD  structure provides a clear and systematic organization for research articles, 
guiding readers through the logical progression of the research process from introduction to discussion 
and aiding in better comprehension of the study's purpose, methodology, r esults, and implications.  
 
2.1.4 Referencing and Citations:   Referencing and Citations are crucial components of research article 
writing as they acknowledge and credit the sources of information used in the paper, support arguments, 
and provide credibilit y to the work.  
 
Referencing:  
Definition: Referencing refers to the systematic way of acknowledging sources used in a research paper 
by providing detailed information about those sources in a standardized format.  
 
Citations:  
Definition: Citations are speci fic mentions within the text of the research paper that indicate the source 
of information or ideas being referenced.  
 
Importance:  
a. Avoid Plagiarism:  Proper referencing and citations help to avoid plagiarism by giving credit to the 
original authors or so urces of information.  
b. Support Arguments:  Citations strengthen arguments by providing evidence from existing literature, 
research, or expert opinions.  
c. Credibility and Validity:  Referencing adds credibility and validity to the research by demonstrating  
that the author's claims are supported by established sources.  
 
Elements of Referencing and Citations:  
a. In-text Citations:  These appear within the text of the paper and typically include the author's last 
name and publication year (e.g., (Smith, 2019)).  
b. Reference List/Bibliography:  This is a list of all the sources cited in the paper. It includes detailed 
information such as author(s), title, publication date, publisher, and page numbers (based on the citation 
style used).  
c. Citation Styles:  Differen t academic disciplines use specific citation styles (e.g., APA, MLA, 
Chicago, Harvard) that dictate the format for in -text citations and the reference list. Each style has its 
guidelines for citing different types of sources like books, journals, websites,  etc. 

--- Page 5 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 5 of 17 
 d. Direct and Indirect Citations:  Direct citations involve quoting directly from a source, while indirect 
citations involve paraphrasing or summarizing the information from a source.  
 
How to Use Referencing and Citations in Research Article Writing ? 
• Ensure every idea, fact, or direct quote that is not common knowledge is properly cited.  
• Use in -text citations whenever you refer to or quote from a source.  
• Create a comprehensive reference list or bibliography at the end of the paper, listing all  sources 
used in the paper.  
• Follow the specific citation style required by the journal or academic institution.  
Proper referencing and citations are essential not only for academic integrity but also for acknowledging 
the contributions of others, allowing readers to trace and verify information, and situating your research 
within the existing body of knowledge.  
2.1.5 Submission and Post -submission:  These steps in research paper writing involve finalizing the 
paper and handling the publication or disseminati on process.  
A. Submission  
1. Final Review:  
• Before submission, thoroughly review the entire paper for accuracy, coherence, and adherence to 
guidelines.  
• Check citations, formatting, grammar, and spelling to ensure the paper meets the required standards.  
2. Prepare Cover Letter (for Journal Submission):  
• When submitting to a journal, craft a cover letter addressing the editor, briefly summarizing the paper's 
significance, and highlighting its contribution to the field.  
3. Submission to Journals /Conferences:  
• Submit the paper to a relevant journal or conference based on the guidelines provided by the 
publication or event.  
• Follow the submission instructions carefully regarding formatting, file types, word count, and 
supplementary materials.  
4. Await Review/Feedback:  
• After submission, the paper undergoes a peer review process where experts in the field evaluate its 
quality, validity, and significance.  
• This stage may take time, and authors typically receive feedback from reviewer s or editors regarding 
acceptance, revisions, or rejection.  
B. Post-Submission  
1. Response to Reviewers (if applicable):  
• If reviewers request revisions, carefully address each comment or suggestion, making necessary 
changes to improve the paper.  
• Craft a detailed response letter outlining the revisions made and the reasons for those changes.  
2. Revision and Resubmission:  
• Revise the paper based on the feedback received from reviewers or editors.  
• Ensure all required changes are implemented effectively and the paper meets the publication's 
standards.  
 

--- Page 6 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 6 of 17 
 3. Acceptance and Publication:  
• If the paper is accepted, the publication process begins, and the paper moves towards publication.  
• Authors might need to sign publication agreements, provide copyright permissions, or make final 
formatting adjustments.  
4. Proofreading and Final Checks : 
• Before publication, carefully proofread the paper to catch any last -minute errors or formatting issues.  
• Ensure all citations, references, figures, and tables  are accurate and properly formatted.  
5. Publication and Dissemination:  
• Once finalized, the paper is published in the journal or presented at the conference.  
• Share the paper with colleagues, peers, and relevant communities through presentations, social  media, 
or academic networks to maximize its impact.  
6. Post-Publication Communication:  
• Engage with readers, respond to queries, and participate in discussions related to your published work.  
• Consider writing blog posts, press releases, or summaries to  reach wider audiences.  
The submission and post -submission stages are crucial in the research paper writing process, as they 
determine the visibility, impact, and dissemination of your findings within the academic or professional 
community.  
2.2 Thesis Writing  
Thesis writing is a structured process that involves presenting an original research project or study in a 
formal academic document. The breakdown of the typical components included in a thesis  are: 
 
i. Synopsis:  A synopsis is a brief overview of the entire thesis. It outlines the main research problem, 
objectives, methodology, and expected outcomes. It serves as a snapshot of what the thesis is about.  
 
ii. Introduction:  The introduction sets the stage for the the sis. It provides background information on 
the topic, explains the research problem, states the objectives or hypotheses, and outlines the 
significance or relevance of the study.  
 
iii. Literature Review:  This section critically examines existing scholarly works, research, and 
literature  relevant to the thesis topic. It discusses and analyzes the key theories, concepts, findings, and 
debates in the field, highlighting gaps that the current research aims to fill.  
 
iv. Aim and Objectives:  The aim defines the o verall purpose or goal of the research, while objectives 
break down this aim into specific, measurable, and achievable tasks. Objectives guide the research 
process and help in achieving the overall aim.  
 
v. Methodology:  This section details the methods and  procedures used to conduct the research. It 
describes the research design, data collection methods, sampling techniques (if applicable), tools or 
instruments used, and data analysis techniques.  
 
vi. Time Frame:  Sometimes included in the methodology sectio n, the time frame outlines the schedule 
or timeline for completing different stages of the research, including data collection, analysis, and 
writing.  
 

--- Page 7 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 7 of 17 
 vii. Results and Discussions:  The results section presents the findings obtained from the research. It 
can include tables, graphs, or statistical analyses. The discussion section interprets these findings, relates 
them to the research questions or objectives, compares them with existing literature, and explores their 
implications.  
 
viii. Conclusions:  This se ction summarizes the key findings of the research, reiterates the significance 
of the study, and discusses its implications. It may also suggest areas for further research.  
 
Each of these components contributes to the overall structure and coherence of the  thesis, helping to 
present a well -rounded and thorough investigation into the chosen research topic. The specific format 
and requirements for a thesis can vary based on academic disciplines and institutions.  
These components of the Thesis are further discussed in detail as follows.  
2.2.1 Synopsis  
This is presented in the form of a brief research proposal for approval of the topic from the authorities . 
The length of each part of the synopsis may vary depending on the requirement of individual in stitutional 
guidelines, trend and as per the instructions of Supervisor.  
a. Title  
Choosing a research topic or title (i.e., getting started) is perhaps the most difficult part of writing a 
synopsis. Title tells us the full story and it reflects the ascent of the complete research. Title of a synopsis 
must be the same (word to word) the title of your thesis.  
Title should be – Catchy , Should not be too lengthy , Broadly cover the topic , Should easily create 
Interest , Clear , Precise , Justify the time limit . 
b. Introduction  
Introduction of synopsis should cover the little background informa tion of the topic. In brief one must 
explain that what work already exists in this area. And What are its strength and deficiencies?  
Thing to remember  
• Should be started reflecting background  
• Justifying the need of research  
• Statement of problem  
• How your research is different from existing one?  
• References should be cited  
Things which you should never do  
• Should not write about yourself and your supervisor  
• Don’t expose the whole idea and about your expertise  
• Don’t forget to relate your work with basic literature  
c. Literature review  
Literature review (LR) can be defined in many ways.  
“Systematic and organized compilation and critical study of related body of knowledge is literature 
survey.”  
“A literature r eview surveys books, scholarly articles, and any other sources relevant to a particular 
issue, area of research, or theory, and by so doing, provides a description, Summary, and critical 
evaluation of these works in relation to the research problem being i nvestigated.”  

--- Page 8 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 8 of 17 
 What are the criteria for selecting literature...?  
• Should be restricted to 10  to 20 research paper (Important)  
• References should be latest  
• Research paper should be preferred over review  
• Should be 100 percent relevant to the topic   
For synopsis there can be two ways of writing literature review  
• Paragraph wise little description of paper  
• Running discussion of all the selected papers  
d. Aims and Objectives  
Aim of the study should be in the form of a statement which somewhere re flects the hope what you want 
to do and where you want to finish. Aim is about what you want to do and objective is about how you 
are going to do that.  
Aim should be –  
• Brief and concise  
• Realistic (Means weather you can achieve them in the given time period)  
Objectives  
These objectives should be SMART (Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant and Time bound). In 
totality the set of object ives should meet the aim of the study. Objectives are list of things (Point wise) 
you are going to do to ach ieve your aim and it visualizes the sequence of each step of your research.  
Objectives should not be  
✓ Be too vague, ambitious  
✓ Repetitive  
✓ Lengthy  
✓ Messy  
e. Methodology  
Methodology involves the process of carrying out the actual research. In case of scien ces state the 
method which you used to prepare. synthesize, to analyze and mention how did you perform it and 
describe the materials and equipment used in the research.  
For humanities you should state which method you used to collect data/ information/cas es etc...and 
explain if any randomization techniques/statistical methodology you are going to apply. Methodology 
can usually be divided into a few sections depending upon the area of research.  
Methodology should be  
• Clear  
• Concise  
• Conclusive  
 
 
f. Time Schedule of Work  
This is just like a simple time table of your work. This part should tell when you a re going to finish a 
task in the entire duration and also tells how the completion of a phase of the work is related with the 
commenc ement of the next phase. Once your problem statement / formulation and objectives are 
approved by your supervisor, all details should be added to your time plan.  

--- Page 9 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 9 of 17 
 This is either given by CPM (Critical path method), PERT chart (Performance evaluation review  
technique) or by simple tabular presentation. It covers –  
• Literature search,  
• Potential fieldwork (e.g. interviews and/or questionnaire administration),  
• Procurement of raw materials  
• Compilation of data/preparation and synthesis  
• Data analysis  /Evaluation  
• Result writing /Discussion  
g. References  
A synopsis should have limited references depending upon the prescribed guidelines. In general, a 
synopsis should have about 10 -15 latest references. References should be properly and uniformly cited 
in the text. The way of references writing should be uni form as there are number of reference writing 
styles.  
All references should be  
• Relevant to the topic  
• Latest one  
• Research articles  
• Authentic one (should be of reputed journals and books)  
2.2.2 Results and Discussion  
Results  
The result part is very easy to write, as it is just compilation of facts and observations. And discussion is 
discussing the observed facts and data with the help of supporting papers (literature). In general practice 
one can write results and discussions in two ways .  
- Write results and discussions separately  
- one can write the results and discussion simultaneously  
Or there may be specific guidelines of writing the same (it depends)  or you may have to follow the 
instructions of your supervisor. But in any way, it is up to you that how effectively you can present it so 
that it is very easy to understand. You should guide the findings of your study in a logical sequence by 
using non -textual elements (mostly if possible), such as, figures, charts, photos, maps, tables, etc.  
You can start the section stating in brief that with what you have done in the study. Then take the results 
of experiments one by one. And if you are little Confused about certain results just recall your research 
question and then deci de What and in which sequences it must be written. The sequences of the results 
Should follow the listed methodology, or you can write in order from most relevant to least important 
one.  
Points to remember while writing the results - 
• Always write results section in past/ past perfect tense  
• Make sure that each table and figure has a number and a title  
• There should be one single way of writing table  
• Focus on writing just observations and data (interpretation relevance and justif ication of 
observed data you can do in discussion part)  
Things you should never do while writing - 

--- Page 10 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 10 of 17 
 • Do not manipulate the finding (An expert reviewer can easily trace the manipulations, and this 
may result in bad consequences. Even a small manipulation can make your whole work 
questionable and unreliable ).  
• Do not ignore negative results  
• Do not over actualize the findings  
• Do not repeat the same information  
• Do not confuse table with figure  
Discussions  
Discussion of a thesis is the centric part that everyone wants to read. It shall  be strong enough to deal 
with the all probable queries of readers and evaluator. Discussion involves the interpretation of your 
research findings and, significance in the related area of research and  finally stating the addition of new 
findings along with existing one.  
The discussion part grooms your findings and enforces the reader to think critically and analyze the 
research problem and of course it brings out the space for further extension of the  study. Overall it 
reflects the importance of your Study in the existing area.  
• You can start by writing your research problem in brief following importance of your study . 
• Mention similar studies (compare and contrast Your research findings with existi ng one /and 
Discuss possible reasons of similarity and dissimilarities with other related studies.)  
• Follow the same sequence of writing as you did in results section .  
• Discuss how other researches supported your findings (other researches include references of 
reputed and high impact journals.  
• Mention if any clinical relevance (supported by literature) .  
• Consider alternative findings if you can justify with the supp ortive literature .  
• State limitations and weakness of your study (mention wisely) .  
• Make suggestions for further research (In brief) .  
• Lastly concise the summary of the principal findings regardless of their significance . 
Things you should not do ... while writing discussions  
• Do not over interpret  (interpretation should be supported by literature)  
• Do not rewrite results  
• Do not add new results  
• Do not repeat the things  
• Do not criticize others (if you find anything in contrast, just mention,  professionally)  
2.2.3 Conclusion s 
Writing a conclusion for a thesis is crucial as it's the final part that summarizes your work  and presents 
key findings. The structured approach to crafting a strong conclusion for thesis  includes : 
a. Summarize Your Thesis Statement:  
Revisit your thesis statement and briefly restate it, emphasizing its significance in light of the 
research /work  conducted.  
b. Recap Key Points:  
Summarize the main points and arguments presented in your thesis. Highlight the essential findings, 
methodologies used, and the significance of your research /work  in addressing the research question or 
problem statement.  

--- Page 11 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 11 of 17 
 c. Discuss Contributions an d Implications:  
Discuss the contributions your research /work  has made to the field. Explain how your findings fill gaps 
in existing knowledge, offer new perspectives, or suggest practical implications for the subject area.  
d. Reflect on Limitations:  
Acknow ledge any limitations in your research methodology, data collection, or analysis. Discuss how 
these limitations might have impacted your findings and suggest areas for future research to address 
these limitations.  
5. Reinforce the Significance:  
Reiterate t he importance of your research in the broader context of the field. Discuss how your work 
adds value, contributes to the existing knowledge base, and why it's relevant.  
6. End with a Strong Closing:  
Finish your conclusion with a strong closing statement th at reinforces the significance of your work. 
You can provide a thought -provoking remark, suggest practical applications, or propose avenues for 
further research.  
 
Tips:  
Be Concise : Keep the conclusion concise while covering all necessary points.  
Avoid Intr oducing New Information:  The conclusion isn’t the place to introduce new ideas or 
information.  
Connect Back to Introduction:  Create a link between the introduction and conclusion to provide a 
sense of closure.  
Example:  
In summary, this thesis explored [topic] through [methods]. The findings underscore the importance of 
[thesis statement] and contribute significantly to the unde rstanding of [subject]. While limitations exist, 
such as [limitations], the implications of this research for [field] are noteworthy. Moving forward, 
further investigations could delve into [potential future research]. Ultimately, this study highlights the  
relevance of [topic] and its impact on [field], emphasizing the need for continued exploration in this 
area.  
Remember, the conclusion serves as the final impression for your reader, so ensure it effectively 
encapsulates the essence and importance of your research.  
2.3 Research Proposal Writing  
2.3.1 Types of Research Projects:  
Research projects can be categorized into various types based on their aims, methodologies, and 
purposes. A brief introduction to some common types of research projects  are given as under:  
i. Descriptive Research:  
Descriptive research aims to describe characteristics or traits of a particular phenomenon  without 
manipulating variables. It provides a comprehensive picture of the subject, such as demographics, 
behaviors, or trends, using methods like surveys, observations, or case studies.  
ii. Experimental Research:  
Experimental research involves manipulati ng variables to establish cause -and-effect relationships. 
Researchers control and manipulate variables to observe their impact on the outcome. It often includes 

--- Page 12 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 12 of 17 
 a control group and an experimental group, utilizing methods such as randomized controlled tria ls 
(RCTs) to test hypotheses.  
iii. Exploratory Research:  
Exploratory research seeks to explore new areas or gain insights into poorly understood phenomena. It 
focuses on generating ideas, hypotheses, or initial understandings rather than testing specific 
hypotheses. Methods include literature reviews, interviews, or focus groups.  
iv. Correlational Research:  
Correlational research examines the relationship between two or more variables without establishing 
causation. It measures the degree of association between variables using statistical analysis to determine 
if changes in one variable relate to changes in another.  
v. Qualitative Research:  
Qualitative research aims to understand underlying reasons, motivations, and attitudes by exploring in -
depth perspectives and experiences. It often involves methods like interviews, focus groups, or 
ethnographic observations to gather rich, subjective data.  
vi. Quantitative Research:  
Quantitative research involves collecting numerical data and analyzing it u sing statistical methods. It 
aims to quantify relationships, patterns, or behaviors and relies on surveys, experiments, or structured 
observations to collect data.  
vii. Longitudinal Research:  
Longitudinal research studies a group of subjects over an extend ed period, observing changes or 
developments over time. It's useful in understanding trends, developmental patterns, or the long -term 
effects of interventions.  
vii. Action Research:  
Action research involves collaboration between researchers and practitione rs to address real -world 
problems or improve practices. It emphasizes practical solutions, often conducted within a specific 
organizational or community context.  
ix. Mixed Methods Research:  
Mixed methods research combines both qualitative and quantitative approaches to gain a comprehensive 
understanding of a research problem. It allows researchers to triangulate findings, providing a more 
holistic view.  
These types of research projects serve diverse purposes and employ various methodologies, catering to 
different research questions and objectives within academia, industry, or other fields of study.  
2.3.2 Major Funding Agencies in India  
Following is a list of some major funding agencies in India across various sectors:  
A. Government Funding Agencies:  
Department of Science and Technology (DST):  Supports scientific research, technology development, 
and innovation.  

--- Page 13 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 13 of 17 
 Indian Council of Medical Research (IC MR):  Promotes biomedical research and supports medical 
studies.  
Department of Biotechnology (DBT):  Focuses on biotechnology research, development, and 
application.  
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR):  Encourages scientific and industrial r esearch.  
University Grants Commission (UGC):  Provides funding for higher education and research in 
universities and colleges.  
All India Council for technical Education (AICTE):  Promotes Quality in Technical Education 
through funded Trainings, Research & Sc holarships  
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY):  Supports research and development 
in electronics, IT, and related areas.  
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR):  Promotes agricultural research and education.  
B. Non-Governmenta l Funding Agencies:  
Tata Trusts:  Engages in various philanthropic activities, including funding research and social 
programs.  
Infosys Foundation:  Supports various social causes, including education, healthcare, and research.  
Reliance Foundation:  Engages in  initiatives across education, healthcare, rural transformation, and 
other sectors.  
Wellcome Trust/DBT India Alliance:  Funds biomedical research and fellowships in India.  
Azim Premji Foundation:  Focuses on education and supports initiatives in the field.  
Indian National Science Academy (INSA):  Provides funding for research and fellowships in sciences.  
Human Frontier Science Program (HFSP):  Offers grants for international collaborations in life 
sciences research.  
Please note that this list might not be exhaustive, and the landscape of funding agencies in India can 
change with time. Additionally, there might be other regional or specialized funding organizations 
operating in specific states or focusing on particular  research domains.  
2.3.3 Preliminary Requirements for Research P roposal Writing  
Preliminary requirements for creating a comprehensive research proposal include:  
i. Identification of Research Problem:  
Define and articulate the research problem or question clearly. Ensure it is specific, researchable, and 
relevant to the field of study.  
ii. Literature Review:  
Conduct a thorough review of existing literature related to your research topic. Identify gaps, 
controversies, or areas requiring further expl oration.  
iii. Research Objectives and Hypotheses/Research Questions:  
Clearly state the objectives of your research. Formulate hypotheses (for quantitative studies) or research 
questions (for qualitative studies) that guide your investigation.  

--- Page 14 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 14 of 17 
 iv. Methodology:  
Detail the research design, approach, methods, and techniques you intend to employ. Explain how you 
will collect, analyze, and interpret data. Consider ethical considerations and address them in this section.  
v. Research Plan/Timeline:  
Develop  a timeline or plan that outlines the various stages of the research process. Include milestones, 
deadlines, and activities to demonstrate the feasibility of your research.  
vi. Significance/Justification:  
Explain the significance of your research. Highligh t its potential contributions, implications, or 
applications to the field. Justify why this research is important and relevant.  
vii. Research Team and Resources:  
Outline the qualifications of the research team, if applicable, and describe the resources nee ded (such as 
equipment, facilities, funding) to conduct the research.  
viii. Budget:  
Prepare a detailed budget outlining the expected expenses for the research, including costs for materials, 
personnel, travel, and other relevant expenditures.  
ix. Reference s: 
Provide a comprehensive list of references cited in your proposal, adhering to the required citation style.  
x. Proposal Formatting and Structure:  
Follow the guidelines provided by the funding agency or institution regarding proposal structure, length, 
font, spacing, and any specific formatting requirements.  
xi. Proof  reading and Editing:  
Ensure your proposal is free from grammatical errors, typos, and inconsistencies. Edit and revise the 
content to ensure clarity, coherence, and logical flow.  
xii. Compliance with Guidelines:  
Adhere strictly to the guidelines provided by the funding agency, institution, or specific call for 
proposals. Ensure you cover all required sections and meet submission criteria.  
xiii. Feedback and Revisions:  
Seek feedback from mentors, colleagues, or advisors and revise your proposal based on constructive 
criticism and suggestions to strengthen its quality.  
Crafting a research proposal involves meticulous planning, thorough research, and clear articulation of 
the research plan to persuade reviewers or evaluators of the merit and feasibility of your proposed study.  
2.3.4 Standard Heads in Research Proposal  
Following are the standard heads in a research proposal.  
(i). Title of the Project:  Title shall  be representativ e and r elated to the need -based research/ hot topic/ 
within the scope of the funding agency. One can go through the titles which have been granted funds by 
the agency earlier and see what kinds of projects are prioritized or preferred for funding, Title sh all be 
specific , unambiguous , clear and  error free.  
(ii). Summary of the Project:  Should be of one page/ 300 -500 words. It should be concise and provide 
complete roadmap of research. It should contain need, Aim/objective, methodology, plan and expected 
outcome in a concise way . It must be flawless, and should be cohesive and coherent.   
 

--- Page 15 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 15 of 17 
 (iii). Origin of Idea/ Background/ Introduction/ Rational :  
Origin of Idea:  This section typically elucidates how the idea for the research emerged. It could stem 
from gaps in existing literature, personal experiences, observations, or practical problems. Explaining 
the genesis of the idea helps reviewers or readers understand th e context and motivation behind your 
research.  
Background:  Here, you provide a detailed overview of the existing knowledge related to your research 
topic. This involves summarizing relevant theories, studies, and findings that form the foundation upon 
whic h your research stands. It's crucial to showcase your understanding of the subject matter and 
highlight what is already known.  
Introduction:  This part introduces the main topic of the research proposal. It serves as a bridge between 
the background information and the specific focus of your study. The introduction often includes the 
research objectives, questions, and hypotheses, setting the st age for the proposed investigation.  
Rationale:  This section outlines the justification for conducting the research. It explains why the study 
is necessary, what knowledge gaps it aims to address, and the potential contributions to the field. 
Presenting the  rationale involves emphasizing the significance and relevance of your research, 
underscoring its potential impact or practical implications.  
(iv). Aim and Objectives : 
Aim:  The aim encapsulates the overarching goal or the broad purpose of the research. It' s a concise 
statement that explains the ultimate outcome or what the research intends to accomplish. The aim 
provides direction and focus to the entire study, guiding the formulation of research questions, 
methodologies, and analysis.  
Objectives:  Objective s break down the aim into specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time -
bound targets that the researcher aims to accomplish within the study. They represent the smaller, more 
manageable steps that collectively lead to fulfilling the broader aim. Ob jectives should be clear, realistic, 
and directly related to addressing the research problem. They provide a roadmap for the research 
process, guiding the methods, data collection, and analysis.  
It is essential to ensure that the objectives are:  SMART  
Spec ific: Clearly defined and focused.  
Measurable: Able to be quantified or assessed.  
Achievable: Realistic and feasible within the scope of the study.  
Relevant: Directly aligned with the aim and research questions.  
Time -bound: Clearly specifying when the obje ctives are expected to be achieved  
(v). Literature Review and Methodology  
Literature Review:  This section summarizes and critically evaluates existing literature relevant to the 
research topic. It demonstrates an understanding of the current state of knowledge, identifies gaps or 
controversies, and justifies the need for the proposed study. The l iterature review provides a foundation 
for the research by highlighting key findings, theories, and methodologies used in previous studies 
related to the research question.  
Methodology:  The methodology section outlines the research design, approach, method s, and 
techniques that will be employed to address the research objectives. It details how the research will be 

--- Page 16 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 16 of 17 
 conducted, including data collection methods, sample selection, data analysis techniques, and any tools 
or instruments to be used. Clarity and j ustification of the chosen methodology are crucial to convince 
the funding agency  of the study's feasibility and reliability.  
(vi). Time -line: A timeline is a chronological plan outlining the proposed schedule or sequence of 
activities to be conducted thro ughout the research project. It presents a structured breakdown of tasks, 
milestones, and their anticipated durations.  The timeline helps demonstrate the feasibility of the research 
by indicating when specific phases of the study will be undertaken . Usuall y time -line is presented 
through tabular and/or graphical way.   
(vii). Budget with the Justification : This section shall include itemized breakdown of anticipated 
expenses required to conduct the proposed research project. It includes all costs associated with the 
study, such as personnel, equipment, materials, travel, participant compensation, and other relevant 
expenditures.  
The justification part explains and validates each budget item, providing a rationale for why these 
expenses are necessary for the successful completion of the research.  This section helps reviewers or 
funding agencies understand the financial needs of the project and evaluate its feasibility and cost -
effectiveness.  
(viii). Expertise/facilities available : It outlines  the expertise relevant to the proposed research, 
showcasing the capability to successfully execute the project. This section may include the educational 
background, previous research experience, publications, and any specialized skills or knowledge that 
the team members possess, emphasizing their suitability for conducting the proposed research.  
Additionally, the facilities aspect refers to the resources, equipment, and infrastructure available or 
accessible to the research team for carrying out the study.  It details any specialized facilities, 
laboratories, computing resources, or other physical infrastructure that will support the research 
activities. Highlighting the available expertise and facilities helps demonstrate the capability and 
readiness of the  research team to undertake and accomplish the proposed research objectives.  
(ix). Expected Outcome : This section outlines the anticipated results or findings that the researcher 
foresees as a result of conducting the proposed study. These outcomes represe nt the specific 
contributions or impacts the research aims to achieve.  
Expected outcomes can include:  
Findings:  Anticipated discoveries, results, or data that the research is likely to produce.  
Conclusions:  Expected interpretations or implications drawn from the findings.  
Contributions : Potential advancements in knowledge, theory, practice, or policy.  
Impact : Expected effects on the field of study, industry, community, or society at large.  
(x).  References : This section shall provide a list of all the sources cited within the proposal. It includes 
the bibliographic details (such as author(s), title, publication year, etc.) of the books, articles, research 
papers, and other materials referenced throughout the proposal. This section is crucial as it 
acknowledges the existing literature, theories, and research that inform and support the proposed study. 
It follows a specific citation style (e.g., APA, MLA, Chicago) and helps readers locate and verify the 
sources used to develop the research proposal.  
*** 

--- Page 17 ---
Module 2: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Righ ts (22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 17 of 17 
  
Short Answer Type Questions : 
 
1. Define a research paper briefly.  
2. What role does the literature review play in a research paper?  
3. Explain the role of proper referencing in a research paper.  
4. Define the function of the methodology section in a thesis.  
5. What information should be included in the budget section of a research proposal?  
6. Mention any two key objectives of writing a research paper.  
7. Define ‘Literature Review’ and state its importance in thesis writing.  
8. List any two differences betwe en a thesis and a research proposal.  
9. What is a Gantt chart and how is it useful in thesis writing?  
10. What are preliminary requirements before writing a research proposal?  
 
Descriptive type Questions : 
   
1. State and explain at least 8 key reasons why writing research papers is important.  
2. Explain briefly the steps involved in writing research papers with the help of a flow chart.  
3. Discuss briefly the different sections in the IMRaD style of writing research article.  
4. Explain the importance and  elements of ‘Referencing and Citations’ with respect to research article 
writing.  
5. Explain Submission and Post -submission step in research article writing.  
6. What do you mean by Thesis Writing? Explain briefly the typical components of a Thesis.  
7. Briefly explain the common types of research projects.  
8. Discuss the preliminary requirements for research proposal writing.  
9. Briefly explain the different standard heads in research proposal writing.  
10. Describe the common mistakes to avoid in writi ng research papers, theses, and proposals. Suggest 
strategies to improve clarity and impact.  
Discussion type Questions:  
1. Given the abstract of a research article, identify and explain whether it effectively presents the aim, 
methodology, key findings, and conclusion. Justify your answer.  
2. Analyze a sample thesis introduction and literature review. Identify gaps, redundancies, and areas needing 
improvement. Suggest revisions.  
3. Evaluate two research proposals on the same topic submitted to d ifferent funding agencies. Discuss which 
one is better and why, using clear criteria.  
4. Design a graphical abstract or flow diagram to represent the methodology section of your current or 
proposed research work.  
5. Break down the components of a published research paper and map them to the IMRaD structure 
(Introduction, Methods, Results, and Discussion). Comment on the logical flow.  
6. Assume you are guiding a junior student in writing their thesis. Prepare a week -wise timeline (Gantt chart) 
for completing each chapter efficiently.  
7. Critique the referencing style and ethical integrity of a given research article. Discuss whether proper 
citation and plagiarism avoidance measures have been followed.  
8. Draft a short r esearch proposal (one page) on a topic of your choice, including title, objectives, 
methodology, expected outcomes, and budget outline.  
9. Compare and contrast the role of illustrations in a research paper versus a thesis. Which format benefits 
more from v isual aids and why?  
10. Develop a checklist for students to self -assess their research paper or thesis before submission. The 
checklist should include technical, ethical, and formatting aspects.  


================================================================================
FILE: 22RMI57 Module 3 Notes.pdf
================================================================================

--- Page 1 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 1 of 20 
 Module -3 Introduction to IPR and Patents (5 hours)  
Introduction to Intellectual Property: Types of IP, Role of IP in the economic and cultural 
development of the society, IP governance, IP as a global indicator of innovation, National IPR 
Policy in India.  
Patents: Conditions for patent, Non -patentable matters, Inventions Eligible for Patenting , Salient 
features of the Indian Patent 1970, Process of patenting, Types of patent applications, Patent 
infringements. Case examples . 
 
3.1 Introduction to Intellectual Property  
3.1.1 Introduction  
Human Beings are distinguished from animals by the intellectual capability endowed on them by the 
Almighty. The Human Beings have thus elevated themselves to the present ‘Civilized State’ solely 
on account of exercise of their intellectual capabilities.  
Intellectual Property, which is a product of intellec tual capability and labour, is therefore, another 
class of property and it emanates primarily from the activities of human intellect. Intellectual Property 
relates to information which can be incorporated in tangible objects and reproduced in different 
locations. For Example, Patents, Designs, Trade Marks and Copyright. The rights accrued on the 
owner of such property (Intellectual Property) are termed as Intellectual Property Rights (IPR).  
3.1.2 Meaning  
Intellectual Property (IP) refers to the creations of the human mind, like inventions, literary and artistic 
works, and symbols, names, images and designs used in commerce. It can be divided into two 
categories viz., Industrial property, which includes inventions (patents), trademarks, industrial  
designs, and geographic indications of source; and Copyright, which includes literary and artistic 
works such as novels, poems and plays, films, musical works, artistic works, such as, drawings, 
paintings, photographs and sculptures, and architectural des igns. Rights related to copyright include 
those of performing artists in their performances, producers of phonograms in their recordings, and 
those of broadcasters in their radio and television programs. Intellectual property rights protect the 
interests o f creators by giving them property rights over their creations.  
The most noticeable distinction between Intellectual Property and other forms of properties is that 
Intellectual Property is intangible, that is, it cannot be defined or identified by its own physical 
parameters. It must be expressed in some discernible way to be protectable. Generally, it encompasses 
four separate and distinct types of intangible properties, namely, Patent, Trademark, Copyright, and 
Trade Secret, which collectively are referre d to as “Intellectual Property.” However, the scope and 
definition of Intellectual Property is  constantly evolving with the inclusion of newer forms under the 
gambit of Intellectual Property. In recent times, Geographical Indications, Protection of plant 
varieties, Protection for semi -conductors and integrated circuits, and Undisclosed Information have 
been brought under the umbrella of Intellectual Property.  
3.1.3 Relevance  
In today's competitive world ‘Innovation’ is the buzz word and is the main require ment for the survival 
of every business. Identifying, developing, and leveraging innovations provide a competitive edge to 
the business and it aids in its long -term success as well. There is a misnomer that Intellectual property 
is limited  to technology co mpanies. However, the fact is that it is a necessity and is very much valuable 

--- Page 2 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 2 of 20 
 for every  business which invests huge sums in its research and development programmes in order to 
create new and  useful indigenous products and services.  
Thus, a company ought t o be proactive in implementing its IP solutions to identify novel innovations, 
and thus increase its revenues. A well -defined IP goal not only helps in achieving business objectives 
but also  helps in positioning the company/organisation as a business leader in the marketplace. With 
growth in its  business revenues, company’s IP strategy can include protection of certain unique 
aspects of its assets  which may also result in fostering innovations to explore new geographies. This 
can be achieved t hrough  licensing or joint ventures to create novel solutions and that satisfy the unmet 
needs of the society.  
There is also a need for a company to evaluate its existing Intellectual Property in order to ensure that 
it is in  line with its business objectiv es. Such an activity helps the company to identify new ways to 
leverage the  Intellectual Property through licensing opportunities available to it. Companies must 
always be on a lookout  for some new avenues to expand their product offerings, increase their sales 
revenue, and foray into new  markets.  
3.1.4 Role of Intellectual Property (IP) in Economic and Cultural Development of Society  
1. Encourages Innovation and Creativity  – IP rights protect the creations of inventors, artists, 
and innovators, motivating the m to develop new technologies, products, and cultural works.  
2. Promotes Economic Growth  – Patents, copyrights, and trademarks allow creators to 
commercialize their work, leading to new industries, job creation, entrepreneurship, and 
improved competitiveness.  
3. Attracts Investment  – Strong IP systems encourage domestic and foreign investments, as 
businesses feel secure in protecting their innovations.  
4. Supports Cultural Development  – Copyright protection safeguards literature, music, films, 
and art, enabling cultural diversity, preservation of traditions, and encouragement of artistic 
talent.  
5. Knowledge Sharing and Technology Transfer  – IP systems strike a balance between 
rewarding creators and allowing public access after protection expires, facilitating broader 
knowledge dissemination.  
6. Consumer Confidence  – Trademarks ensure product authenticity and quality, protecting 
consumers from counterfeit goods and enhancing trust in the market.  
In summary : Intellectual Property plays a dual role – it fuels economic development  through 
innovation, trade, and employment, while also enriching cultural growth  by safeguarding creativity, 
heritage, and artistic expression.  
 3.1.5 Types of Intellectual Property (IP):  
India remains one of the world’s most growing economies in past 20 years and the ballgame of  
entrepreneurship and industries is a key element for contribution outstanding growth of Indian 
economy. On  one hand, where businesses and their successful run is vital to the growth of economy; 
on the same hand, a  structured set of IP protection helps in the advancement and development of 
businesses under a hassle -free environs. Henceforth, aligning the International practices, India too is 
having a systemized legal system to  take care of IP protection . The different types of IP in India are:  

--- Page 3 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 3 of 20 
 a. Patent:  A patent grants proprietary rights on an invention, allo wing the patent holder to exclude 
others from making,  selling, or using the invention. Inventions allow many businesses to be successful 
because they develop new  or better processes or products that offer competitive advantage on the 
marketplace. One could  get a patent  by filing a patent application with the Patent Office in India.  The 
application for the grant of patent can be made by either the  inventor or by the assignee or legal 
representative of the inventor. In India, the term of the patent is for 20 years. The patent is renewed 
every year from the date of patent . 
As per the Patents Act, 1970, "invention" includes any new and useful;  
• art, process, method or manner of manufacture;  
• machine, apparatus or other article;  
• substance produced by manuf acture, and includes any new and useful improvement of any 
of them,  and an alleged invention;  
The definition of the word "Invention" in the Patents Act, 1970 includes the new product as well as 
new process. Therefore, a patent can be applied for the "Product" as well as "Process" which is new, 
involving  inventive step and capable of industrial application can be patented in India.  
b. Copyrights:  Copyrights protect original works of authorship, such as literary works, music, 
dramatic works, pantomimes  and choreographic works, sculptural, pictorial, and graphic works, sound 
recordings, artistic works,  architectural works, and computer software. With copyright protection, the 
holder has the exclusive rights to  modify, distribute, perform, create, display,  and copy the work.  
 
The greatest fear and challenges to the copyright industry is the piracy of works whether, books, 
musical  works, films, television programmes or computer software or computer database . Copyright 
in India is governed by Copyright Act, 1957. This Act has been amended several times to keep  pace 
with the changing times. As per this Act, copyright grants author's lifetime coverage plus 60 years 
after death under certain classes whereas in other classes it is 60 years in toto.  
c. Trademarks:  A trademark is a word, phrase, symbol, or design that distinguishes the source of 
products (trademarks) or  services (service marks) of one business from its competitors. In order to 
qualify for protection, the  mark must be distinctive. For example, the Nike "swoosh" design identifies 
athletic footwear made by Nike.  
As per The Trade Marks Act 1999 ("TM Act") Trademarks mean any words, symbols, logos, slogans, 
product packaging or design that identify the goods  or services from a particular so urce. Trademark 
means a mark capable of being represented graphically and which is capable of distinguishing the  
goods or services of one person from those of others and may include shape of goods, their packaging 
and combination of colors.  The renewable t erm of registration of a trademark is ten years . 
Any business entity needs to be cautious in selecting its trade name, brands, logos, packaging for 
products,  domain names and any other mark which it proposes to use. One must do a proper due 
diligence before  adopting a trademark .  
Examples of well -known trademarks are Google, Tata, Yahoo, Pepsi, Reliance, etc . 
d. Industrial Designs:  Today, industrial design has become an integral part of consumer culture 
where rival articles compete for  consum er's attention. It has become important, therefore, to grant 

--- Page 4 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 4 of 20 
 adequate protection to an original  industrial design.  In India Designs Act, 2000 has been enacted for 
the purpose.  
The design law excludes from its purview the functioning features of an article  and grants protection 
only to  those which have an aesthetic appeal . A table, for example, would have a flat  surface on which 
other objects can be placed. This is its functional element. But its shape, colour or the way  it is 
supported by legs or otherwise, are all elements of design or artistic elements and therefore, registrable  
as design if unique and novel.  
Furthermore, once a design is registered, the registered proprietor is afforded protection for an initial 
period of 10 (ten) years, which is extendable (upon filing an application for extension) for a further 
period of 5 (five) years.  
e. Geographical Indications:  The Geographical indication of Goods (Registration and Protection) 
Act, 1999 provides adequate protection to geographical in dications in India. A ‘Geographical 
Indication’ is defined as ‘an indication which identifies such goods as agricultural goods, natural 
goods or manufactured goods as originating, or manufactured in the territory of country, or a region 
or locality in that  territory, where a given quality, reputation or other characteristic of such goods is 
essentially attributable to its geographical origin’. The GI Act covers only goods such as agricultural 
goods, food stuff, handicraft goods, manufactured goods, and natu ral goods.  
A registered geographical indication is awarded protection for a term of ten (10) years with the option 
of renewing and extending such protection for further tenures of ten (10) years from the date of 
expiration of the original registration.  
Some examples  are Darjeeling Tea, Banarsi Saree, Basmati Rice, etc.  
f. Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout - Design: A ‘semiconductor integrated circuit’ is 
defined as ‘a product having transistors and other circuitry elements which are i nseparably formed on 
a semiconductor material or an insulating material or inside the semiconductor material and designed 
to perform an electronic circuitry function’.  
Under the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout - Design Act, 2000 (“SICLD Act”) , All 
layout -designs capable of being registered are required to be original; commercially unexploited 
anywhere in India and in any convention countries; inherently distinctive and inherently 
distinguishable from other registered layout - designs. the protecti on afforded to registered layout -
designs is for a period of 10 (ten) years.  
g. Plant Varieties and Farmer’s Rights :  Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers 
Rights  (PPV&FR) Act, 2001 permits any breeder, farmer and any person as authorized, to apply for 
registration of a new plant variety. A new plant variety is registrable if it satisfies the conditions of 
‘novelty, distinctiveness, uniformity and stability’. recognize rights of Indian farmers and to provide 
protection to plant varieties in order to encourage the growth and development of more plant varieties.  
The validity of registration for the protection of a plant variety is for a period of nine (18) years in the 
case of trees and vines, and for a period of six (15) years in the case of crops, wit h the option of 
renewal of such registrations.  
 

--- Page 5 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 5 of 20 
 3.1.6 Role of International Institutions  
Intellectual property has a dual nature, i.e. it has both a national and international dimension. For 
instance,  patents are governed by national laws and rules of a gi ven country, while international 
conventions on  patents ensure minimum rights and provide certain measures for enforcement of rights 
by the contracting  states. Strong protection for intellectual property rights (IPR) worldwide is vital to 
the future economic growth  and development of all countries. Because they create common rules and 
regulations, international IPR  treaties, in turn, are essential to achieving the robust intellectual 
property protection that spurs global  economic expansion and the gro wth of new technologies.  
List of some leading Instruments concerning Intellectual Property Rights are : 
1) The Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property  
2) The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works  
3) The WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT)  
4) The Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT)  
5) Budapest Treaty on International Recognition of Deposit of Microorganisms for  Purposes of 
Patent Procedure  
6) The Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks and the Protocol 
Relating to the Madrid Agreement  
7) The Hague Agreement Concerning the International Deposit of Industrial Designs  
8) The Trademark Law Treaty (TLT)  
9) The Patent Law Treaty (PLT)  
10)  Treaties on Classification  
11)  Special Conventions in Field of Related Rights: The Inte rnational Convention for Protection 
of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations (“the Rome 
Convention”)  
12) The WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT)  
13)  The International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants  
14) The Agreement on Trade -Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (“TRIPS”) and 
WIPO -WTO Cooperation . 
3.1.7 IP system in India (IP Governance)  
(i). Patents:  (The Patents Act, 1970 )  
The Indian Patent Office, under the Controller General of Patents, Designs & Trade Marks, administers 
the patent system.  India follows a first -to-file system, where the first person to file a patent application 
for an invention is granted the rights.  Patent protection is typically granted for a period of 20 years  from 
the filing date.  
(ii). Trademarks:  (The Trade Marks Act, 1999 )  
The Office of the Controller General of Patents, Designs & Trade Marks oversees trademark 
registration.  Trademark protection is granted for a period of 10 years, renewable indefinitely.  The system 
aims to prevent unauthorized use of trademarks and protect brand identities.  
(iii). Copyrights:  (The Copyrights Act, 1957 ) 
Copyright protection in India is governed by the Copyright Act.  It covers literary, artistic, and musical 
works, as well as computer software.  Copyright protection is generally granted for the lifetime of the 
creator plus 60 years.  

--- Page 6 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 6 of 20 
 (iv). Designs:  (The Design Act, 2000 ) 
The Design Act, 2000  governs the registration and protection of industrial designs in India.  Registered 
designs are protected for an initial period of ten years, extendable for another five years.  
(v). Geographical Indications (GIs):  The Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and 
Protection) Act, 1999  
India has a system for the protection of Geographical Indications, ensuring that products associated with 
a particular region are protected from unauthorized use.   
A registered geographical indication is awarded protection for a term of ten (10) years with  the option 
of renewing and extending such protection for further tenures of ten (10) years from the date of 
expiration of the original registration.  
(vi) Plant Varieties:  The Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmer’s Rights Act, 2001 (“Plant 
Varieties Ac t”) 
The Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act 2001 is an Act to provide for the establishment 
of an effective system for protection of plant varieties, the rights of farmers and plant breeders and to 
encourage the development of new varieties of plants.  
The validity of registration for the protection of a plant variety is for a period of nine (18) years in the 
case of trees and vines, and for a period of six (15) years in the case of crops, with the option of renewal 
of such registrat ions. 
(vii)). The Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout - Design Act, 2000 (“SICLD Act”)  
Under the SICLD  Act, all layout -designs capable of being registered are required to be original; 
commercially unexploited anywhere in India and in any convention countries; inherently distinctive and 
inherently distinguishable from other registered layout - designs  protec tion afforded to registered layout -
designs is for a period of 10 (ten) years.  
Enforcement:  
The IP system in India is enforced through legal mechanisms, including civil and criminal remedies for 
infringement.  
3.1.8 Intellectual Property (IP) as a Global Ind icator of Innovation : 
1. Patent Filings as Innovation Measure  – The number of patents filed worldwide reflects the 
level of research, technological advancement, and innovative activity in a country.  
2. Copyright and Creative Works  – Growth in copyrights registered (books, films, music, 
software) indicates cultural and creative innovation in society.  
3. Trademarks and Branding  – Trademark registrations show the emergence of new 
businesses, products, and services, acting as a sign of en trepreneurial innovation.  
4. Geographical Indications (GIs)  – Recognition of unique regional products demonstrates 
innovation in preserving traditional knowledge and local industries.  
5. Benchmark for Competitiveness  – Global indices like the Global Innovation I ndex (GII)  
use IP data (patents, trademarks, designs) as key metrics to rank countries’ innovation 
performance.  
6. Encourages R&D Investment  – Countries with higher IP activity attract more foreign 
investment and collaborations, strengthening their global inn ovation standing.  

--- Page 7 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 7 of 20 
 3.1.9 National IPR Policy in India  
The National Intellectual Property Rights Policy is a policy document released by the Government of 
India in 2016. Its aim is to provide a roadmap for India's IPR regime. It takes into account national 
development priorities and the global economic scenari o.  
o The Department for Promotion of Industr y and Internal Trade (DPIIT)  under the Ministry of 
Commerce  adopted the National Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Policy in 2016.  
o The main goal of the policy is  "Creative India; Innovative India".  
o The policy covers all forms of IP,  seeks to create synerg ies between them and other agencies, 
and sets up an institutional mechanism for implementation and review.  
o DPIIT is the nodal department for IPR development in India  and the  Cell for IPR Promotion 
& Management (CIPAM) under DPIIT is the single point of ref erence  for implementing the 
policy.  
o India's IPR regime complies with  World Trade Organisation's (WTO)  agreement on  Trade 
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property (TRIPS).  
Objectives of National IPR Policy :  
There are seven important objectives of the IPR policy:  
o IPR Awareness:  Outreach and promotion are important to create public awareness about the 
economic, social and cultural benefits of IPRs among all sections of society.  
o Generation of IPRs : To stimulate the generation of IPRs.  
o Legal and Legislative Framework : To have strong and effective IPR laws, which balance 
the interests of rights owners with larger public interest.  
o Administration and Management:  To modernise and strengthen service -oriented IPR 
administration.  
o Commercialisation of IPRs:  Get value for IPRs through commercialisation.  
o Enforcement and Adjudication:  To strengthen the enforcement and adjudicatory 
mechanisms for combating IPR infringements.  
o Human Capital Development : To strengt hen and expand human resources, institutions and 
capacities for teaching, training, research and skill building in IPRs.  
Salient Features of National IPR Policy : 
The salient features of the IPR policy have been given below:  
o National IPR Policy aims to boos t innovation and entrepreneurship while safeguarding public 
interest by making IPR a marketable fiscal asset.  
o The special focus is on the following:  
o creating awareness and efficient implementation of IPRs and  
o promoting IP commercialization through incentiv es. 
o The Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) will be the nodal agency for all IPR 
issues, including copyrights.  
o Trademark offices will expedite scrutiny and registration, aiming to reduce the time.  
o Copyright protection will cover films, music, and industrial drawings.  
o Domestic IPR filings for the entire value chain, from creation to commercialization, will be 
enabled.  

--- Page 8 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 8 of 20 
 o An efficient loan guarantee scheme will support start -ups. 
o The policy grants legislative flexibility to the GoI in global treaties and TRIPS agreements.  
Achievements under the new National IPR policy : 
o Reduction in pendency of IPR applications:  The pendency of IPR  applications has reduced 
significantly since the implementation of the new National IPR Policy. For example, the 
pendency of patent applications has reduced from 1,97,934 as on 31.3.2016 to 1,39,274 as on 
31.10.2022.  
o Increase in IPR filings:  There has bee n a significant increase in IPR filings since the 
implementation of the new National IPR Policy. For example, the number of patent filings has 
increased by nearly 7% in the first 8 months of 2022 -23 vis -à-vis the corresponding period of 
2021 -22. 
o Strengthen ing of institutional mechanisms:  The new National IPR Policy has led to the 
strengthening of institutional mechanisms for the administration and protection of IPRs. For 
example, the Intellectual Property Office has been revamped. The number of examiners ha s been 
increased.  
o Increased awareness about IPRs:  There has been an increase in awareness about IPRs among 
the public since the implementation of the new National IPR Policy. This is due to the various 
awareness -raising campaigns and initiatives undertaken  by the government.  
National Intellectual Property Rights Policy – The Way Forward : 
• The academic curricula should be rebooted, and the innovation environment should be 
stimulated in schools.  
• An appropriate resolution mechanism for resolving issues related to IPR is required.  
• India will not be able to take full benefit of the transformative gains of a robust IP system unless 
and until it addresses gaps in its IP laws and provisions.  
• The success of India’s flagship schemes – Make in India  and Startup India schemes depends on 
the boost of the innovation ecosystem with improved IPR safeguarding.  
• More awareness is required for the generation, protection, and execution of IPRs to boost the 
Indian industry not only to innovate but also to safeguard and enforce their innovations.  
 
3.2 Patents  
3.2.1 Concept  
Nature of a Patent. - A Patent is a grant (in the form of a document) by the Government, given for 
disclosing a new invention by an Inventor or a group of Inventors or otherwise an applicant. Once 
the Patent is issued, it  gives to the Inventor or the applicant, as the case may be, an exclusive right 
to sell, manufacture and use the  invention disclosed in the Patent. The legal exclusive  right in the 
Patent can be exercised by the  Inventor/applicant only in the country which grants the right. This 
right can be exercised only for a limited  period of time, normally known as the ‘Term of the Patent’. 
Therefore, on the expiry of the Term of t he Patent, the invention becomes a public property.  
Patent vis -à-vis Property Rights. - A Patent is similar to a property, like a car, a house or a business. 
When one  receives a Patent, the person would have achieved something that few have accomplished. 
Therefore,  securing a Patent is an achievement worthy of celebration. When someone infringes the 

--- Page 9 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 9 of 20 
 Patent of others, it  is similar to the act of stealing somebody’s car, house or business. For the term 
prescribed under the Patents  Act, 1970, the legal rights u nder the Patent are the property of the Patent 
Holder, provided the Patent is in  force, meaning that the prescribed renewal fees are paid within the 
prescribed period.  
Rights vested on the Patentee. - Patent represent one of the most powerful Intellectual P roperty 
Rights.  These rights can be a very important economic tool if used effectively and diligently. For 
instance, Patent  rights can bring a substantial income through the manufacture or licensing of the 
invention covered in the  Patent. Patent also repre sents a long -term security. Patent provides a right 
to the Patentee to prevent a third  party from commercially using the patented invention without the 
permission of the Patentee.  
Role of Patents. - Patent gives the Patentee the right to take legal action t o prevent others from 
commercially  exploiting the patented invention in the country which grants the Patent without the 
permission of the  Patentee (Proprietor). The grant of a Patent for an invention however does not 
guarantee the merit of the  invention di sclosed therein. The country that grants the Patent does not 
guarantee the legitimacy of the  Patent. The Government does not give any financial or any other 
award/assistance to the  Inventor(s)/Patentee(s) along with the grant of the Patent. It is left to the 
Patentee to commercially exploit the  Patent and make profit from it.  
Objective of securing a Patent. - It is commonly believed that securing a Patent automatically brings 
in Wealth  and Prosperity. This is not correct. Securing a Patent is only one aspec t of the process that 
may lead to  success if one is able to commercially use the invention. Though each invention is 
different but the objectives  of securing a Patent protection for the inventions are basically the same, 
they are:  
─ To make money. - One has  to evaluate the invention and its potential to be converted into wealth.  
─ To gain security. - It is required to protect the invention from any unauthorized commercial use.  
─ To gain knowledge. - Learning the patenting process is easy and when mastered, it can save one  
from substantial professional charges. Furthermore, through the knowledge thus gained one can  
extend the life of the Patent and consequently the earnings from it.  
─ To have fun. - Patenting can be an enjoyable exercise because it motivates one to innovate new  
things and to make them succeed.  
3.2.2 Patents Act 1970 and its Amendments  
A patent is a type of intellectual property owned by the creator, who is the brains behind the creation. 
The Indian Patent Laws are defined by the Indian Patents Act of 1970. Patent rights are granted 
under this law for inventions that cover a new and inventive process, product, or article of 
manufacture and meet the novelty, inventive steps, and industrial applicability requirements. The 
main objective of the Indian Patent Act is to encourage innovation, which will eventually lead to 
technological development in India. The Indian Patent Act of 1970 reflects a balance between 
promoting innovation and safeguarding public interests. It has been amended over ti me to adapt to 
the evolving global landscape while maintaining a focus on fostering innovation and accessibility to 
essential goods and services.  
 
 

--- Page 10 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 10 of 20 
 Objectives of the Indian Patent Act 1970:   
• It provides protection for the intangible possessions of intellect. It gives a boost to the 
scientific research domains, new technology, and industrial progress.  
• The monopoly is facilitated to the innovator for the utilization of the product and also for 
letting others use the invention subject to their permissi on for the same.  
• The innovator who has acquired the patent possesses absolute rights on deciding whether the 
product can be commercialized or not. They can prevent the exploitation and 
commercialization of the product that has been patented.  
• The patent fac ilitates the right to construct, sell, offer for sale, and import innovations.  
• The major objective of the Indian Patent Act is to prevent the infringement of the product by 
others. In case any duplicate product is claimed to be original innovation the pate nt holder 
can present their rights.  
Salient features of the Indian Patent 1970:  
▪ Not only Product but also Process can be patented under act.  
▪ Invention shall be useful, novel and something which is not obvious.  
▪ Shall be capable of getting used in Industry, if not then it may amount to revocation of patent.  
▪ Invention shall be new and shall not form part of Section 3 and 4, which provide for exceptions 
of ideas which cannot be patented.  
▪ Term of patent – 20 years (can be renewed) . 
▪ Patent Examination can be conducted on request.  
▪ Both pre -grant and post -grant opposition is enabled.  
▪ Fast track mechanism shall prevail for disposal of appeals if any disparity exists.  
▪ Values to protect integrity of Indian Constitution’s various clause such as Ar ticle 51 -A of 
fundamental Duties is also taken into consideration by nurturing and keeping nature and rich 
heritage of culture in mind. Hence Provision for protection of bio -diversity and traditional 
knowledge is specified in act.  
▪ Publication of applicatio ns after Eighteen months with facility for early publication enable 
getting patented rights as if it was registered from day if reasonableness of time is observed.  
 
Note:  Under the provisions of Section 159 of the Patents Act, 1970 the Central Government i s 
empowered to make  rules for implementing the Act and regulating Patent administration. 
Accordingly, the Patents Rules, 1972  were notified and brought into force w.e.f. 20th April 1972. 
These Rules were amended from time to time till  20th May 2003 when new Patent Rules, 2003 were 
brought into force by replacing the 1972 rules. These rules were further amended by the Patents 
(Amendment) Rules, 2005,  Patents (Amendment) Rules, 2006, Patents (Amendment) Rules 2012, 
Patents (Amendment) Rul es 2013,  Patents (Amendment) Rules 2014, Patents (Amendment) Rules 
2015, Patents (Amendment) Rules 2016 , Patents (Amendment) Rules 201 7 and  Patents 
(Amendment) Rules 20 21 respectively.  
3.2.3 Patentability Criteria  
A Patent is granted for an invention whic h may be related to any process or  product. An invention 
is different from a discovery. A discovery is something that already existed but has now  been 
discovered.  Not all inventions are Patentable. An invention must fulfil certain requirements in order 

--- Page 11 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 11 of 20 
 to be qualified as  Patentable. These requirements are known as ‘ Conditions of Patentability’. The 
term ‘invention’ under the  Patents Act, 1970 has been defined as ‘a new product or process involving 
an inventive step and capable of  industrial application.’  
The conditions of Patentability are:  
• Novelty  
• Inventive step (non -obviousness) and  
• Industrial applicability (utility)  
Novelty. - A novel invention is one which has not been disclosed in the prior art where ‘prior art’ means  
everything that has been published, presented or otherwise disclosed to the public on the date of Patent  
(The ‘Prior Art’ includes documents in foreign language s disclosed in any format in any country of the 
world).  For an invention to be judged as novel, the disclosed information should not be available in the 
'Prior Art'.  This means that there should not be any prior disclosure of any information contained in t he 
application for  Patent (anywhere in the public domain, either written or in any other form, or in any 
language) before the  date on which the application is first filed i.e. the 'priority date'.  
Inventive Step (Non -obviousness) .- ‘Inventive step’ is a fe ature of an invention that involves technical  
advancement as compared to existing knowledge or having economic significance or both, making the  
invention non -obvious to a person skilled in that art. Here definition of ‘inventive step’ has been 
enlarged to  include economic significance of the invention apart from already existing criteria for 
determining the  inventive step.  
An invention shall not be considered as involving an inventive step, if, having regard to the state of the 
art, it  is obvious to a perso n skilled in the art. The term ‘obvious’ means that something which does not 
go beyond  the normal progress of technology but merely follows plainly or logically from the prior art, 
i.e., something  which does not involve the exercise of any skill or ability beyond that to be expected of 
the person skilled in  the art.  
For this purpose a ‘person skilled in the art’ should be presumed to be an ordinary practitioner aware of 
what  was general common knowledge in the relevant art at the relevant date. In so me cases the person 
skilled in  the art may be thought of as a group or team of persons rather than as a single person.  
Industrial Applicability . - An invention is capable of industrial application if it satisfies following three  
conditions, cumulatively:  
• can be made;  
• can be used in at least one field of activity;  
• can be reproduced with the same characteristics as many times as necessary.  
3.2.4 Patentable and Non - Patentable Subject Matter  
Patentable Subject Matter:  Patents may be granted for inventions/technologies in any field,  ranging 
from a paper clip or ballpoint pen to a nanotechnology chip  or a Harvard mouse (mouse with cancer 
genes).  
It is a general belief that patents are awarded only to major  scientific breakthroughs. But, it is not true. 
In fact, the majority of  patents are granted to inventions displaying an improvement over  the existing 
invention. For example, many patents can be awarded  to a single molecule e.g. penicillins (an antibiotic 
that kills  microbes) and its derivatives. The derivatives are made by making  subtle changes in the 
structure of the penicillin resulting in  new/improved properties, such as acid stability or temperature  

--- Page 12 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 12 of 20 
 stability or killing a wide range of microbes (germs).  The new  antibiotic molecules, known as second, 
third or fourth generation  penicillin  can also be patented.  
In our daily life, we use many patented items, such as  toothbrush, toothpaste, shoes, pen, eyeglasses, 
textiles, mobile  phones, wrist watch, bicycle , scooter, car, television, cold drinks,  beverages and many 
more. It is not uncommon that many products  contain several inventions (patents) e.g. the laptop 
computer  involves hundreds of inventions working together. Similarly, cars,  mobile phones and 
telev isions have many patented components.  
Following are the patentable subject matters:  
Any article, apparatus or machinery or its component . 
Any substance whether living or non -living product, pharmaceutical product . 
Any composition of matter, pharmaceutical  products . 
Any process, manner or art of manufacturing other than essential biological process . 
Non- Patentable Subject Matter:  In the Patent Act, 1970, there are some exclusions (product and 
processes) that cannot be patented, such as:  
(i) An invention which is frivolous, or which claims anything obviously contrary to well established 
laws are not inventions . For example, A machine alleged to be giving output without any input.  
(ii) An invention, the primary or intended use or commercial e xploitation of which would be contrary 
to public order or morality or which causes serious prejudice to human, animal or plant life or health or 
to the environment is not an invention. For example, a method of adulteration of food, any device, 
apparatus or machine or method for committing theft.  
(iii) The mere discovery of a scientific principle or the formulation of an abstract theory or discovery  of 
any living thing or non -living substance occurring in nature is not an invention. For  example, finding of 
a new substance or micro -organism occurring freely in nature is a discovery and  not an invention.  
(iv) The mere discovery of a new form of a known substance which does not result in the  enhancement 
of the known efficacy of that substan ce or the mere discovery of any new property or  new use for a 
known substance or of the mere use of a known process, machine or apparatus unless  such known 
process results in a new product or employs at least one new reactant is not an  invention.  
(v) A sub stance obtained by a mere admixture resulting only in the aggregation of the properties of  the 
components thereof or a process for producing such substance is not an invention.  
(vi) The mere arrangement or re -arrangement or duplication of known devices eac h functioning  
independently of one another in a known way is not an invention.  
(vii) A method of agriculture or horticulture is not an invention. For example, a method of producing 
mushrooms, improved soil etc.  
(viii) Any process for the medicinal, surgica l, curative, prophylactic, diagnostic, therapeutic or other  
treatment of human beings or any process for a similar treatment of animals to render them free of  
disease or to increase their economic value or that of their products is not an invention. For ex ample, a 
method of cleaning plaque from teeth.  
(ix) Plants and animals in whole or any part thereof other than micro -organisms but including seeds,  
varieties and species and essentially biological processes for production or propagation of plants  and 
anima ls are not inventions.  

--- Page 13 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 13 of 20 
 (x) A mathematical or business method are not  inventions and hence not patentable.  
(xi) A literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or any other aesthetic creation whatsoever including  
cinematographic works and television productions is not an invention.  
(xii) A mere scheme or rule or method of performing mental act or method of playing game is not an  
invention. For example, a method of teaching, a method of learning etc.  
(xiii) Topogra phy of integrated circuits is not an invention.  
(xiv) An invention which in effect, is traditional knowledge or which is an aggregation or duplication 
of known properties of traditionally known component or components is not an invention. For example,  
the antiseptic properties of turmeric for wound healing.  
3.2.5 Process of Patenting  
The patent granting procedure in India typically involves several steps.  
Step 1: Filing of Patent Application:  The process begins with the filing of a patent application at the 
Indian Patent Office (IPO). The application must contain a detailed description of the invention, along 
with any necessary drawings, claims, and other relevant information.  
Step 2: Formal E xamination:  Once the application is filed, it undergoes a formal examination by the 
patent office. During this stage, the patent office examines the application to ensure that all formal 
requirements have been met. This includes checking for compliance wit h formatting rules and payment 
of the necessary fees.  
Step 3: Publication:  After the formal examination, the application is typically published in the Official 
Journal of the Indian Patent Office. This publication serves to notify the public about the exis tence of 
the patent application  
 
Figure. Flow chart presenting the patent granting procedure in India.  
.Step 4: Substantive Examination:  Following publication, the application undergoes substantive 
examination to assess the novelty and inventive step of the invention claimed in the application. The 
applicant may be required to respond to any objections raised by the patent office during th is 
examination.  
Step 1:  
Filing of Patent 
Application  
Step 2: 
Formal Examination  
Step 3: 
Publication  
 
 
Step 4: 
Substantive Examination  
Step 5: 
Publication of 
Examination Report  
Step 6: 
Amendments and 
Responses  
Step 7: 
Grant of Patent or 
Refusal  
Step 8: 
Issuance of Patent 
Certificate  
Step 9: 
Publication of Granted 
Patent  

--- Page 14 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 14 of 20 
 Step 5: Publication of Examination Report:  Once the substantive examination is complete, the patent 
office issues an examination report detailing any objections or deficiencies found in the application. This 
report is published in the Offic ial Journal, and the applicant is given an opportunity to respond to the 
objections raised.  
Step 6: Amendments and Responses:  The applicant has the opportunity to address any objections 
raised by the patent office by making amendments to the application or  providing arguments and 
evidence in support of the patentability of the invention.  
Step 7: Grant of Patent or Refusal:  If the patent office is satisfied with the responses provided by the 
applicant and finds that the invention meets the criteria for paten tability, a patent is granted. However, 
if the patent office determines that the invention does not meet the requirements for patentability, the 
application may be refused.  
Step 8 : Issuance of Patent Certificate:  If the patent application is successful, th e patent office issues 
a patent certificate to the applicant. This certificate serves as official recognition of the patent rights 
granted to the inventor.  
Step 9: Publication of Granted Patent:  The details of the granted patent are published in the Offici al 
Journal, providing public notice of the patent rights.  
It is important to note that the patent granting procedure in India can be complex and may involve 
multiple rounds of examination and correspondence between the applicant and the patent office. 
Additionally, the timeline for obtaining a patent can vary dependin g on factors such as the backlog of 
applications at the patent office and the complexity of the invention.  
3.2.6 Types of Patent Applications  
(i) Provisional Application - A patent application filed when the  invention is not fully finalized, and 
some part of the invention is  still under experimentation. Such type of application helps to  obtain the 
priority date for the invention.  
(ii). Ordinary Application - A patent application filed with complete  specifications and claims but 
without claiming any pri ority date.  
(iii).  PCT Application - An international application filed in  accordance with PCT. A single application  
can be filed to seek  patent protection and claim priority in all the member countries  of PCT.  
(iv). Divisional Application - When an appli cation claims more than  one invention, the applicant on 
his own or to meet the official  objection on the ground of plurality may divide the application  and file 
two or more applications. This application divided out  of the parent one is known as a Division al 
Application. The  priority date for all the divisional applications will be the same  as that of the main (the 
Parent) Application (Ante -dating).  
(v).  Patent of Addition Application - When an invention is a slight  modification of the earlier 
invention fo r which the patentee has  already applied for or has obtained a patent, the applicant can go  
for ‘Patent of Addition ‘, if the modification in the invention is  new. Benefit - There is no need to pay a 
separate renewal fee for  the Patent  of ‘Addition ‘, duri ng the term of the main patent. It  expires along 
with the main patent.  
(vi).  Convention Application - If a patent application has been filed  in the Indian Patent Office, and 
the applicant wishes to file the  same invention in the one or more Convention countries (e.g.  Paris 
Convention) by claiming the same priority date on which  application was filed in India, such an 

--- Page 15 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 15 of 20 
 application is known as  Convention Application. The applicant must file Convention  Application within 
12 months from the date o f filing in India to  claim the same priority date.  
3.2.7  Patent Search and Databases  
An important step before filing a patent application is to conduct a patent search. Just as companies need 
to do due diligence before taking on any business venture, like wise patent owners need to do patent due  
diligence before filing a patent application. A patent search is a search conducted in patent databases as  
well as in the literature available, to check whether any invention similar to  the invention in respect of 
which  patent is to be obtained, already exists. In other words, it evaluates inventor’s chances of getting 
a patent  grant. Therefore, instead of going forth with the filing, if one conducts the patentability search, 
one can get  a clear idea about the patentability of the invention; whether the application should be filed 
and the strengths  and weakness of his invention.  
Since patenting is an expensive procedure, it is prudent to conduct a patentability search before filing 
an application. Although there is an additional expense associated to have a patent search performed, it 
can potentially save the inventor’s money down the road.  
Patent information is made available to the public through a variety of databases. Each database cov ers 
a particular set of patent documents. At present no database has complete coverage of all patent 
documents  ever published worldwide. Thus, it may be necessary to consult multiple databases in order 
to find and then  access patent documents relevant to y our interests . 
Below listed are a few  patent databases that might help in pursuit  of patent data search and analysis.  
Free patent databases  Paid  patent databases  
• Indian Patent Advanced Search System  
(InPASS - 
http://ipindiaservices.gov.in/publicsearch/) . 
• Google Patents  
• Espacenet  
• USPTO Web Patent Database  
• PQAI  
• Patentscope by WIPO  
• WIPO’s INSPIRE  
• Lens.org  • Derwent  
• PatBase  
• Patseer  
• Ambercite  
• Drug Patent Watch  
• Patsnap  
• Patent Inspiration  
• InQuartik’s  Patent Search  
 
3.2.8 Rights of Patentee  
The rights granted by a patent include the following:   
o A patent grants the owner exclusive rights to make, use, sell, or import the patented invention 
for a limited period.  
o The patent holder has the right to prevent others from using the patented invention without their 
permission.  
o A patent provides legal protection against unauthorized use of the invention by others.  
o The patent owner has a monopoly over the invention. It allows them to exploit and 
commerciali ze it without competition.  
o The patent holder can license their invention to others. It grants them the right to use the 
invention in exchange for licensing fees.  

--- Page 16 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 16 of 20 
 o A patent gives the owner the ability to take legal action against anyone who infringes upon th eir 
patent rights.  
3.2.9 Patent Infringement  
Patent infringement occurs when another party makes, uses, or sells a patented item without the 
permission  of the patent holder. The patent holder may choose to sue the infringing party to stop his or 
her activities, as  well as to receive compensation for the unauthorized use. Since intellectual property is 
governed by statutory  law, the patent holder must sue the unauthorized party in court of law.   
The following acts when committed without the consent of the patentee shall amount to infringement:  
(i) Making, using, offering for sale, selling, importing the patented product;  
(ii) Using the patented process, or using, offering for sale, selling or importing the product directly  
obtained by that process.  
Infringements can be classified into two categories:  
Direct Infringement - when a product is substantially close to  any patented product or in  case where 
the marketing or  commercial use of the invention is carried out without the  permission of the owner o f 
the invention.  
Indirect Infringement - When some amount of deceit or  accidental infringement happens without any 
intention of infringement.  If such an unlawful act has been committed, the patentee holds  the right to 
sue the infringer through judicial int ervention. Every  country has certain laws to deal with such unlawful 
acts. Following  reliefs are made available to the patentee:  
• Interlocutory/interim injunction.  
• Damages or accounts of profits.  
• Permanent injunction.  
It is pertinent to mention that the Cen tral government always  holds the rights (Section 100 of the Patent 
Act, 1970, Rule 32 of the  Patent Rules, 2003) to use the invention in the case of national  emergency or 
other circumstances of extreme urgency after  notifying the owner.  
3.2.1 0 Recent Developments  
With the rapid advancement in science and  technology, newer forms of intellectual property  protection 
are emerging. Examples of such protection  are seen in the efforts made to protect computer  programmes 
and softwares, life forms parti cularly  following developments in the biotechnology etc.  
Patent laws of several countries favor patent  protection for software innovation. Such countries  include 
USA, Australia and Singapore, to name a few.  However, many other countries which include India  and 
European nations, have more stringent laws  concerning patent protection to software innovation.  The 
Indian Patent Law does not contain any specific  provision regarding the protection of computer  
software.  
Biotechnology has been at the core of a number  of important developments in the pharmaceutical,  
agrochemical, energy and environmental sectors. In  particular, progress in the field of molecular 
biology,  biotechnology and molecular medicine has  highlighted the potential of biotechnology for the  
pharmaceutical industry.  
 
 

--- Page 17 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 17 of 20 
 a. Patenting of Softwares  
Modern society relies heavily on computer technology. Without software, a computer cannot operate.  
Software and hardware work in tandem in today’s information society. So, it is no wonder that 
intellectual  property protection of software is crucial not only for the software industry, but for other 
businesses as well.  
A software patent is generally defined as a patent that protects some programming technique. The  
Foundation for a Free Information  Infrastructure (FFII) has defined a software patent as being a "patent 
on any performance of a computer realized by means of a computer program ”. The intellectual 
protection of  computer software has been highly debated at the national and international le vel.  
There is intense debate over the extent to which software patents should be granted, if at all. Important  
issues concerning software patents include:  
• Whether software patents should be allowed, and if so, where the boundary between patentable and  
non-patentable software should lie;  
• Whether the inventive step and non -obviousness requirement is applied too loosely to software; and  
• Whether patents covering software discourage, rather than encourage, innovation.  
The Indian Patent Law does not contai n any specific provision regarding the protection of computer  
software. Computer software on the other hand is protected by copyright as applicable to literary and  
aesthetic works. A computer program is therefore dealt with a literary work and the law and practice in  
relation to literary works will apply to computer programs .  
The Indian Patent Act, as of now, excludes only ‘computer programs per se’ from patentability. The 
issue of  whether computer programs tied to certain hardware can be patented is a con troversial one.  In 
India the gaining of  patent protection for software depends more on the drafting skills of the Patent 
Engineer. If the claims are  drafted in such a way as to reflect that the invention is not software per se, it 
shall qualify for patent  protection.  
b. Inventions in Biotechnology  
The exciting developments in the domain of biotechnology have resulted in intensive R&D activities all 
over the world including India. After information technology, biotechnology is increasingly recognized 
as the next  wave in the knowledge -based economy. Biotechnology has been at the core of a number of 
important  developments in the pharmaceutical, agrochemical, energy and environmental sectors. In 
particular,  progress in the field of molecular biology, biot echnology and molecular medicine has 
highlighted the potential  of biotechnology for the pharmaceutical industry.  
The most vital distinction between the legal practices of India and developed countries is that India does 
not allow patenting of micro -organis ms which already exist in nature, as the same is considered to be a  
discovery as per the provisions of the Section 3(d) of the Patents Act, 1970 and therefore not patentable.  
But genetically modified versions of the same microorganisms that result in enhan cement of its known  
efficacies are patentable . 
India enacted the Biological Diversity Act in 2002 for preservation of biological diversity in India and 
the Act provides mechanism for equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of traditional 
biological resources and knowledge.  
 

--- Page 18 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 18 of 20 
 3.2.11 Case Examples : Popular Patent Cases in India  
1. Turmeric Patent Case (1995 –1997) : 
• Issue : US granted a patent to University of Mississippi for turmeric’s wound -healing property.  
• Action : CSIR, India, challenged it, proving turmeric’s use was centuries -old traditional 
knowledge.  
• Outcome : Patent revoked in 1997.  
• Significance : Landmark in safeguarding India’s traditional medicinal knowledge.  
2. Neem Patent Case (1995 –2000) : 
• Issue : European Patent Office (EPO) granted a patent on neem -based fungicide to W.R. Grace 
& USDA.  
• Action : Indian scientists and NGOs opposed it, citing prior traditional use.  
• Outcome : Patent revoked in 2000.  
• Significance : Protected bio -resources and traditional ecologica l knowledge.  
3. Basmati Rice Patent Case (2001) : 
• Issue : US firm RiceTec tried to patent certain basmati rice lines and grains.  
• Action : India contested, proving basmati was indigenous to India/Pakistan.  
• Outcome : Many claims dropped; RiceTec restricted from using the name “Basmati.”  
• Significance : Protected India’s Geographical Indications (GI)  rights.  
4. Novartis v. Union of India (2013) : 
• Issue : Novartis applied for a patent on cancer drug Glivec  (beta crystalline form of imatinib 
mesylate).  
• Action : Patent Office and courts rejected it, saying it was only a modification of an existing 
drug.  
• Outcome : Supreme Court upheld rejection in 2013.  
• Significance : Prevented “evergreening” of patents, ensured affordable access to life -saving 
medicines.  
5. Dimminaco Case (2002) : 
• Issue : Application for a patent on a process involving live vaccine for poultry disease . 
• Action : Initially rejected, arguing processes with living organisms cannot be patented.  
• Outcome : Calcutta High Court ruled such processes are patentable.  
• Significance : Opened scope for patents in biotechnology  in India.  
6. Monsanto BT Cotton Case (2019) : 
• Issue : Monsanto patented genetically modified BT cotton seeds in India.  
• Action : Indian seed companies resisted royalty payments; case reached Supreme Court.  
• Outcome : Court held that plant varieties and seeds cannot be patented  under Indian law.  
• Significance : Strengthened farmers’ rights and clarified scope of biotech patents.  
7. Bajaj Auto vs. TV S Motors (2007 –2010) : 
• Issue : Bajaj accused TVS of infringing its DTSi (Digital Twin Spark Ignition)  engine 
technology patent.  

--- Page 19 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 19 of 20 
 • Action : Bajaj filed infringement case; TVS countered with a revocation petition.  
• Outcome : Settled after prolonged litigation.  
• Significance : One of India’s first high -profile automobile patent disputes . 
8. Ericsson vs. Micromax (2013) : 
• Issue : Ericsson sued Micromax for using its Standard Essential Patents (SEPs)  related to 
GSM, 3G, and EDGE technologies without proper licensing.  
• Action : Dispute over high royalty fees demanded by Ericsson.  
• Outcome : Led to interim arrangements and licensing negotiations.  
• Significance : Landmark case on FRAND (Fair, Reasonable, and Non -Discriminatory)  
licensing in telecom sector.  
These 8 ca ses collectively show how patents in India intersect with traditional knowledge (Turmeric, 
Neem, Basmati), public health (Novartis), biotech (Dimminaco, Monsanto), and industry/tech 
(Bajaj vs TVS, Ericsson vs Micromax)  — shaping India’s IPR policy, innovat ion ecosystem, and 
social justice concerns . 
*** 
Short Answer Type Questions  
1. Define ‘Intellectual Property’.  
2. What are the needs for Intellectual Property Right?  
3. List the types of IPR in India.  
4. Name any 4 leading International Instruments concerning Intellectual Property Rights.  
5. Name any 4 important objectives of the IPR policy  in India.  
6. What are the objectives of securing a Patent protection for the inventions.  
7. What are the conditi ons of patentability?  
8. List the patentable subject matters.  
9. Name any 4 types of Patent Applications.  
10. List the acts that leads to Patent Infringement?  
 
Descriptive type Questions  
1. Explain briefly,  role of Intellectual Property (IP) in Economic and Cultural Development of Society . 
2. Briefly discuss the five important types of Intellectual Property in India.  
3. Discuss Intellectual Property (IP) as a Global Indicator of Innovation  
4. Discuss the objectives and salient features of Nationa l IPR Policy 2016 in India.  
5. Enumerate the objectives and salient features of Indian Patent Act 1970.  
6. Discuss the Patentability Criteria in India.  
7. Briefly explain the different types of patent applications.  
8. Write e a note on patent infringem ents.  
9. Write a note on patentable and non -patentable subject matter.  
10. With the help of flow chart, explain the steps involved in Process of Patenting  in India.  

--- Page 20 ---
Subject:  Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 20 of 20 
  
Discussion type Questions  
1. Choose a recent technological innovation or cultural product (e.g., a mobile app, a film, a biotech 
discovery). Identify the most appropriate type of Intellectual Property protection for it and justify 
your choice.  
2. Apply the principles of the National IPR Policy (2016) to suggest how a start -up in India coul d 
safeguard its innovations while expanding globally.  
3. Imagine you are part of a policy think -tank. Design a framework for strengthening IP governance in 
India that aligns with global innovation indicators while supporting local entrepreneurs and cultural 
industries.  
4. Critically evaluate the role of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) in balancing economic growth with 
cultural preservation in society. Do you think the current framework leans more toward one side . 
5. Apply the conditions for patentability to a sof tware -based invention. Would it qualify for a patent in 
India? Discuss with reasoning.  
6. Analyze the differences between patentable and non -patentable matters in India. How do these 
distinctions influence innovation in pharmaceuticals versus information tech nology?  
7. Evaluate the impact of patent infringement cases on fostering or hindering innovation. Do you think 
strict enforcement always benefits society? . 
8. Imagine you are advising a start -up developing a breakthrough AI -based medical diagnostic tool. 
Design a patenting strategy for them in India and globally.  
*** 
 
 
 


================================================================================
FILE: 22RMI57 Module 4 Notes.pdf
================================================================================

--- Page 1 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 1 of 16 
 Module -4 Copyright and Trademarks (5 hours)  
 Copyright: Classes of copyrights, Salient features of the Indian Copyright Act 1957, Criteria for 
copyright, Copyrights of the author, Copyright Infringements, Non -Copyright Work, Process of 
copyright registration. Copyright cases.  
Trademark: Eligibility Criteria, C lassification, Trade Mark Rules 2017, Advantages of 
registration, Types of trademark registered in India, Process for Trademarks Registration, Case 
examples.   
 
4.1 Copyright  
4.1.1 Introduction  
Copyright as the name suggests  arose as an exclusive right of the author to copy the literature 
produced by him and stop others from doing  so. There are well -known instances of legal intervention 
to punish a person for copying literary or aesthetic  output of another even before the concept of 
copyright took shape. The concept of idea was originally  concerned with the field of literature and 
arts. In view of technological advancements in recent times,  copyright protection has been expanded 
considerably. Today, copyright law has extended protection not only  to literary, dramatic, musical 
and artistic works but also sound recordings, films, broadcasts, cable  programmes and typographical 
arrangements of publications. Computer programs have also been brought  within the purview of 
copyright law.  
Copyright ensures ce rtain minimum safeguards of the rights of authors over their creations, there by 
protecting and rewarding creativity. Creativity being the keystone of progress, no civilized society 
can afford  to ignore the basic requirement of encouraging the same. Economi c and social 
development of a society is  dependent on creativity. The protection provided by copyright to the 
efforts of writers, artists, designers,  dramatists, musicians, architects and producers of sound 
recordings, cinematograph films and computer  software, creates an atmosphere conducive to 
creativity, which induces them to create more and motivates  others to create.  
In India, the law relating to copyright is governed by the Copyright Act, 1957 which has been 
amended in  1983, 1984, 1985, 1991, 1992, 1994, 1999 and 2012 to meet with the national and 
international  requirements. The amendment introduced in 1984 included computer program within 
the definition of literary  work and a new definition of computer program was inserted by the 1994 
amendmen t. The philosophical  justification for including computer programs under literary work has 
been that computer programs are also  products of intellectual skill like any other literary work.  
4.1.2 Meaning of Copyright  
Copyright is a right given by the law to  creators of literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works and 
producers of cinematograph films and sound recordings. In fact, it is a bundle of rights including, 
inter alia, rights of reproduction, communication to the public, adaptation and translation of the work. 
It means the sole right to produce or reproduce the work or any substantial part thereof in any material 
form whatsoever . 
Copyright as to mean the exclusive right to do or authorise the doing of the following acts in respect 
of a work or any substantial part thereof, namely  
In the case of literary, dramatic or musical work (except computer programme):  
(i) reproducing the work in any material form which includes storing of it in any medium 
by electronic  means;  
(ii) issuing copies of the work to the public which are not already in circulation;  
(iii) performing the work in public or communicating it to the pub lic; 

--- Page 2 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 2 of 16 
 (iv) making any cinematograph film or sound recording in respect of the work;  
making any translation or adaptation of the work.  
Further any of the above -mentioned acts in relation to work can be done in the case of translation or  
adaptation of the wor k. 
In the case of a computer programme:  
(i) to do any of the acts specified in respect of a literary, dramatic or musical work; and  
(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for commercial rental any copy 
of the  computer programme. How ever, such commercial rental does not apply in respect of 
computer  programmes where the programme itself is not the essential object of the rental.  
In the case of an artistic work:  
(i) reproducing the work in any material form including depiction in three dimensions of a 
two-dimensional  work or in two dimensions of a three -dimensional  work;  
(ii) communicating the work to the public;  
(iii) issuing copies of work to the public which are not already in existence;  
(iv) including work in any cinematograph film;  
making adaptation of the work, and to do any of the above acts in relation to an adaptation 
of the work.  
In the case of cinematograph film and sound recording:  
(i) making a copy of the film including a photograph of any image or making any other 
sound recording  embodying it;  
(ii) selling or giving on hire or offer for sale or hire any copy of the film/sound recording 
even if such  copy has been sold or given on hire on earlier occasions; and  
(iii) communicating the film/sound recording to  the public.  
In the case of a sound recording:  
• To make any other sound recording embodying it  
• To sell or give on hire, or offer for sale or hire, any copy of the sound recording  
• To communicate the sound recording to the public.  
4.1.3 Criteria for Copyright  
(i). Originality of Work : The work must be an original creation of the author, not copied from 
another source. “Original” does not mean completely new or novel (as in patents), but it should reflect 
minimum creativity, skill, and judgment of the author.  
Example: Writing a poem or programming a unique computer code qualifies; copying from an 
existing text does not.  
(ii). Fixation in a Tangible Form:  The work must be expressed in a material form (written, recorded, 
painted, or saved digitally).  Mere  ideas, thoughts, or concepts are not protected —only their 
expression in a fixed medium is eligible.  
Example: Singing a song spontaneously is not protected unless recorded or written down . 
(iii). Work Must Fall Under Protected Categories: Copyright law in India applies only to specific 
types of works:  Literary works  (books, computer programs, databases, etc.) , Artistic works  
(paintings, drawings, maps, photographs, architecture, etc.) , Music al works  (musical compositions 
without words) , Dramatic works  (plays, choreographies, scripts, etc.) , Cinematograph films  
(movies, video content, etc.) , Sound recordings  (songs, recorded speeches, podcasts, etc.) . 

--- Page 3 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 3 of 16 
 (iv). Compliance with Indian Law:  The work  should not violate existing laws, morality, or public 
policy.  
Example: Works promoting obscenity, sedition, or defamation may not enjoy copyright protection . 
4.1.4 Salient features of the Indian Copyright Act 1957  
a.  Broad Coverage of Works: The  Act provides protection to a wide range of intellectual and 
creative works:  Literary works (books, software, databases, computer programs) , Dramatic works 
(plays, scripts, choreographies) , Musical works (musical compositions) , Artistic works (paintings, 
photographs, architecture, drawings, maps, sculptures) , Cinematograph films (films, videos, visual 
recordings) , Sound recordings (songs, recorded audio, speeches, podcasts) . 
b. Bundle of Exclusive Rights: The copyright owner enjoys a set of rights, includin g:  
Right to reproduce the work , Right to distribute/publish the work , Right to perform in public , Right 
to adapt and translate , Right to communicate the work to the public (including digital/online 
platforms) . 
c. Term of Copyright:  The duration varies wit h the type of work:  
Literary, Dramatic, Musical, Artistic works → Lifetime of the author + 60 years after death.  
Cinematograph films and Sound recordings → 60 years from the year of publication.  
Government works, public undertakings, international organiza tions → 60 years from publication . 
d. Moral Rights (Author’s Special Rights) :   Apart from economic rights, the author has moral 
rights:  
Right of paternity (to be identified as the author) ,  
Right of integrity (to prevent distortion, mutilation, or modification of the work that harms 
author’s reputation) . 
e. Limitations & Exceptions (Fair Dealing/Fair Use):  Certain uses of copyright works are 
permitted without permission, e.g.,  
Private or personal use, research, criticism, or review  
Reporting of curr ent events  
Use for educational purposes  
Reproduction by libraries or archives in specific conditions  
f. Licensing and Assignment:  Copyright can be assigned (transferred) or licensed (permission 
granted) to others.  Licensing includes voluntary licenses and compulsory licenses (in certain public -
interest cases like translations, works for the disabled, etc.).  
g. Digital and Technological Updates (2012 Amendments): Recognition of digital rights and 
protection against technological circumvention.  Provisions for internet broadcasting and digital 
licensing.  
h. Protection Against Infringement: Unauthorized use of a copyrighted work amounts to 
infringement.  Remedies include:  
Civil remedies (injunction, damages, accounts of profit)  
Criminal remedies (fin es and imprisonment)  
4.1.5 Classes of Work 
In India, following classes of Copyrights exist:  
• Literature: Books, Essays, Research articles, Oral speeches, Lectures, Compilations, Computer 
programme, Software, Databases.  
• Dramatics: Screenplays, Dramas.  

--- Page 4 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 4 of 16 
 • Sound Recordings: Recording of sounds regardless of the medium on which such recording is 
made e.g. a Phonogram and a CD -ROM.  
• Artistic: Drawing, Painting, Logo, Map, Chart, Photographs, Work of Architecture, Engravings, 
and Craftsmanship.  
• Musical: Musical notations, excluding any words or any action intended to be sung, spoken or 
performed with the music. A musical work need not be written down to enjoy Copyright 
protection.  
• Cinematograph Films: Cinematograph Film‘ is a visual recording performed by any med ium, 
formed through a process  and includes a sound recording. For example, Motion Pictures, TV 
Programmes, Visual Recording, Sound Recording, etc.  
4.1.6 Copyright Pertaining to Software  
The definition of ”Literary wok” under section 2 (o) of the Copy right  Act, 1957 includes computer 
programmes, tables and compilations including computer "literary data bases. Computer programme 
as stated above was included within the definition of "literary work" in 1984 and the new definition 
of "computer programme" under Section 2 (ffc) introduced in 1994 means a set of instructions 
expressed in words, codes or in any other form, including a machine -readable medium, capable of 
causing a computer to perform a particular task or achieve a particular result.  
Computer programm es (also known as "software") originated with the invention of the computer 
itself. However, it was only with the advent of Personal Computers (PCs) in the 1980s that software 
became widely available and the need for protecting software under Copyright law  became an issue. 
In the initial stages, computer programmes were developed by the manufacturers of computers 
themselves. With the emergence of wide use of PCs, production of software became delinked from 
manufacturers of computers. Development and manufac turing of software has now become an 
independent activity and the number of companies engaged in this activity has also increased. It is 
however the output and variety which has grown manifold which has given rise to problems of 
enforcement of Copyright in  them. While vigorous competition among producers of software has, on 
the one hand brought about improvement in the quality of computer programmes and brought down 
the prices, the increased opportunities have also given rise to what is commonly known as "s oftware 
piracy'' - the activity of duplicating and distributing software without authority from the holder of the 
copyright.  
The philosophical justification for including computer programmes within the definition of ' 'literary 
work'' has been that compute r programmes are also products of intellectual skill like any other literary 
work. Developing a computer programme is an activity which is comparable to the writing of a novel 
or other literary work excepting that the "language" used as well as its uses ar e of a very different 
kind. Though a software can be written by individual programmer, most of the major software’s are 
the outcome of group efforts, where medium to large sized teams spend months or even years to write 
a programme.  
Like the unauthorised c opying of literary works, unauthorised copying of computer programmes also 
attracts the same legal consequences under the Copyright law. However, since the facility of copying 
a computer software and its duplication is within the easy reach of a potential pirate and since copies 
of software are indistinguishable from the original, publishers/owners of software are also confronted 
with daunting problems for safeguarding their interests under the Copyright law when large scale 
software piracy takes place.  
Software piracy has assumed enormous proportions in certain countries and has become a friction 
point in international trade negotiations. Within domestic jurisdictions also software piracy has 

--- Page 5 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 5 of 16 
 thrown up serious challenges to enforcement authorities. The Copy right (Amendment) Act, 1994 has 
tried to address these questions and has incorporated internationally recognized standards and 
procedures for enforcement of copyright in the field of computer programmes. The relevant 
provisions have been discussed under re medies against infringement of copyright.  
4.1.7 Authorship and Ownership and Rights  
Copyright protects the rights of authors, i.e., creators of intellectual property in the form of literary, 
musical, dramatic and artistic works and cinematograph films and sound recordings. Generally the 
author is the first owner of copyright in a work.  
“Author” as per Section 2(d) of the Act means  
• In the case of a literary or dramatic work the author, i.e., the person who creates the work.  
• In the case of a musical work, the composer.  
• In the case of a cinematograph film, the producer.  
• In the case of a sound recording, the producer.  
• In the case of a photograph, the photographer.  
• In the case of any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work which is computer -generated, the 
person who causes the work to be created.  
Ownership of Copyright  
The Copyright laws clearly state the ownership of Copyright.  
• The person who created the work is considered as the first (original) holder (owner) of the 
Copyright.  
• In case the author is an employee and has been contracted to do the work by a proprietor (of  
the company/firm/society /organization, etc.), the owner of the Copyright shall be the 
proprietor.  
• The government will be the primary owner of the government work in the absence of any 
kind of arrangement.  
• The person delivering a speech is the first owner  of the Copyright.  
To obtain permission to use copyrighted material, a request for  the same should be made to the legal 
owner (of the copyrighted  material), which could be the original author, the legal heir (in case  of the 
death of the author), publisher,  etc. The request must mention  the following:  
• Title, author and/or editor, and edition.  
• Precise material to be used.  
• The number of copies.  
• The purpose of the material e.g. educational, research, etc.  
• Form of distribution e.g. hard copy to classroom, posted  on the internet.  
• Whether the material is to be sold e.g. as part of a course pack.  
Copyrights of the Author  
The Copyrights of the creator/author are legally protected under  Section 14 of the Copyright Act, 
1957. The content (i.e. work)  created by the author cannot be used or published by anyone  without 
the author‘s consent. Copyrights provide exclusive rights to  the author in the areas of publication, 
distribution, and usage. A  Copyright owner enjoys two types of rights i.e. Economic Rights (or 
Proprie tary Rights) and Moral Rights (or Personal Rights).  
Economic Rights  are associated with financial benefits accruing  from the sale of copyrights. As per 
the Act, Copyright owners can  authorize or prohibit:  
• Reproduction of the work in any form, including pri nted publications or sound recordings.  
• Distribution of copies of the work.  

--- Page 6 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 6 of 16 
 • Public performance of the work.  
• Broadcasting/communicating the work to the public.  
• Translating the work into other languages.  
• Adaptation of the work, such as converting a novel into  a screenplay.  
Moral Rights  include ‘Right of Paternity‘ and ‘Right of Integrity‘.  The ‘Right of Paternity‘ - even if 
the Copyright has been licensed to  another party, the original author of the work retains the right to  
claim authorship i.e. the name of the author/s will remain even  though Copyrights have been 
transferred to another party e.g. a  book publisher. The ‘Right of Integrity ‘ - the original author has 
the right to prevent misuse of the work e.g. alterations/additions/  deletions in work resulting  in 
misrepresentation of the said work or  harming the honor and reputation of the author.  It is pertinent 
to mention that for a work, there can be more than  one rights holder , for instance, a musical sound 
recording has many  rights holders, such as the lyr icist, music composer, singer,  musicians and sound 
recorders.  
4.1.8 Terms of Copyright  
Literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works enjoy copyright protection for the life time of the author 
plus 60  years beyond i.e. 60 years after his death. In the case of joint authorship which implies 
collaboration of two  or more authors in the production of the work, the term of copyright is to be 
construed as a reference to the  author who dies last.  
In the case of copyright in posthumous, anonymous and pseudonymo us works, photographs, 
cinematograph  films, sound recordings, works of Government, public undertaking and international 
organizations, the term  of protection is 60 years from the beginning of the calendar year next 
following the year in which the work  has been first published.  
The Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1994 has given special right to every broadcasting organisation 
known as  broadcast reproduction right in respect of its broadcasts. This right is to be enjoyed by 
every broadcasting  organisation for a pe riod of twenty -five years from the beginning of the calendar 
year next following the year  in which the broadcast is made. In terms of Copyright (Amendment) 
Act, 1999 if any performer appears or  engages in any performance, he has a special right in relation  
to such performance called performers right to  be enjoyed for a period of fifty years.  
4.1.9 Assignment, Transmission and Licensing  
The owner of the copyright in an existing work or the prospective owner of the copyright in a future 
work may  assign to any person the copyright . Section 18 of the Copyright Act provides for the 
assignment of copyright  in an existing work as well as future work. In both the cases an assignment 
may be made of the copyright  either wholly or partially and generally or subject to limitations and 
that too for the whole period of copyright  or part thereof. However, in case of assignment of copyright 
in any future work, the assignment has the real  effect only when the work comes into existence.  
As per section 19, assignment  of copyright is valid only if it is in writing and signed by the assignor 
or his duly authorized agent. The assignment of a copyright in a work should identify the work and 
specify kind of rights assigned and the duration and territorial extent of such as signment. Further, it 
should specify the amount of royalty payable, if any, to the author or his legal heirs during the 
continuance of assignment and the assignment will be subject to revision, extension or termination 
on terms mutually agreed upon by the parties.  
If the period of assignment is not mentioned it will be deemed to be taken as five years from the date 
of assignment. If the territorial extent of such assignment is not stipulated, it will be taken as 
applicable in whole of India.  

--- Page 7 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 7 of 16 
 The owner of co pyright may grant a license to do any of the act in respect of which he has an exclusive 
right to do. The license can be classified into different categories:  Voluntary license , Compulsory 
license, Statutory license.  
4.1.10 Infringement of Copyrights  
As per the Copyrights Acts, 1957, the following acts are  regarded as an infringement of Copyrights:  
• Making copies for sale or hire or selling or letting them for hire  without permission.  
• Permitting any place for the performance of owned work (in  public) where such 
performance constitutes an infringement of  Copyright.  
• Distributing infringing copies for trade or to such an extent to  affect the interest of the owner 
of the Copyright prejudicially.  
• Public exhibition of infringing copies for trade purposes.  
• Importation of infringing copies.  
• Translating a work without the permission of the owner.  
4.1.1 1 Remedies against Infringement  
There are three kinds of remedies against infringement of copyright, namely:  
1. Civil remedies  
Injunction damages or account of profit, delivery of infringing copy and damages for conversion.  
2. Criminal remedies  
Imprisonment of the accused or imposition of fine or both. Seizure of infringing copies . 
3. Administrative remedies  
Administrative remedie s consist of moving the Registrar of copyrights to ban the import of 
infringing copies into India when the infringement is by way of such importation and the delivery 
of the confiscated infringing copies to the owner of the copyright and seeking the delive ry. 
Jurisdiction of Courts  
A suit or other civil proceedings relating to infringement of copyright is filed in the District Court 
or High Court within whose jurisdiction the plaintiff resides or carries on business or where the 
cause of action arose irresp ective of the place of residence or place of business of the defendant  
Limitation  
The period of limitation for filing the suit is three years from the date of infringement.  
4.1.12 Non -Copyright Work  
The works not under the jurisdiction of Copyrights are as follows:  
a. Ideas, Procedures, Methods & Concepts : Copyright protects only the expression of an idea, not 
the idea itself.  
Example: A mathematical formula, a cooking recipe idea, or a business method cannot be 
copyrighted (though they may  be protected under patents, if applicable).  
b. Facts, News, and Data:  Copyright does not protect facts, historical events, or mere data.  
Example: News of an event cannot be copyrighted, but the way it is written or presented in a news 
article can be.  
c. Official Texts of Laws & Government Works: No copyright subsists in:  
Acts of Parliament/State Legislatures , Judicial decisions, judgments, orders, or notifications issued 
by government authorities.  These are considered public documents.  
 

--- Page 8 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 8 of 16 
 d. Works in Public Domain:  Works whose copyright term has expired automatically fall into the 
public domain.  Anyone can use them without permission.  
Example: Works of Rabindranath Tagore (where copyright has expired) are now free for use.  
e. Titles, Names, Short Phras es & Slogans:  A single word, title of a book, brand name, or short 
slogan is not protected by copyright (though they may be protected under trademark law).  
f. Government Reports and Policies:  Official government reports, press releases, and policy 
document s released for public use are not protected.  
g. Works Contrary to Public Policy / Morality:  Works that are obscene, defamatory, seditious, or 
unlawful are not entitled to copyright protection.  
h. Useful Objects / Functional Designs:  Copyright does not cove r useful objects, industrial designs, 
or methods of construction (these may be protected under patent law or design law instead).  
Example: A chair design for functional use is not copyrightable, but its artistic sketch may be.  
4.1.1 3 Copyright Registration in India  
Securing copyright registration involves a systematic process that includes the following key steps:  
a. Access the official website  
Visit the Official website of the Copyright Office.  Log in with your valid User ID and Pass word. If 
you still need to register, click on “New User Registration ”. Make sure to note down your User ID 
and Password for future reference.  
b. Submission of Application  
 An application containing all the necessary particulars and a statement of the particulars must be 
prepared in the prescribed format (FORM XIV).  
c. Dairy Number Issuance  
Upon receiving the application, the registrar will issue a Dairy Number, marking the initiation of the 
copyright registration process. Subsequently, there is a mandatory 30 -day waiting period for any 
potential objections to be submitted.  
d. Copy Right Objection Handling  
If no objections are raised within 30 days, a scrutinizer will assess the application for any 
discrepancies. If no differences are found, the registration will proceed, and an extract will be 
provided to the registrar for entry into the Register of Copyright.  
e. Objection Resolution  
If objections are received, both parties will receive a notification from the examiner outlining the 
objections. A hearing will be arranged to address these objections.  
f. Application Scrutiny  
Following the hearing and the resolution of objections, the scrutinizer will meticulously review  the 
application if applicable. Subsequently, they will either approve or reject the application, depending 
on the specific circumstances.  
g. Copyright Registration Certificate  
Once the application is approved, the relevant authority will issue the copyrig ht registration 
certificate. In the usual course of events, the entire process typically takes approximately 2 to 3 
months to complete.  

--- Page 9 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 9 of 16 
  
Figure. Workflow of Copyright Registration  
4.1.14 Copyright Cases  
A. R.G. Anand vs. Deluxe Films (1978) : 
Case Summary:  A playwright (R.G. Anand) wrote a play called Hum Hindustani. Later, Deluxe 
Films released a movie New Delhi, which Anand claimed was copied from his play.  
Court’s Decision:  The Supreme Court ruled that ideas cannot be copyrighted, only the expres sion 
of ideas can. Since the film was only inspired by the idea but had a different treatment, there was no 
infringement.  
Key Takeaway:  Copyright protects expression, not ideas.  
 
B. Eastern Book Company vs. D.B. Modak (2008) : 
Case Summary:  Eastern Book Com pany (EBC) published the Supreme Court Cases (SCC) law 
reports, which contained judgments of the Supreme Court along with editorial notes, formatting, and 
headnotes. They sued D.B. Modak for copying.  
Court’s Decision:  Judgments themselves (being government works) are not copyrightable, but the 
editorial work, headnotes, and formatting done by EBC involved skill and judgment, so they were 
protected.  
Key Takeaway:  Copyright exists in original compilations and editorial w ork, but not in raw 
government judgments.  
 
C. Super Cassettes Industries Ltd. vs. Myspace Inc. (2011)  
Case Summary:  Super Cassettes (owner of T -Series music rights) sued Myspace, alleging users 
uploaded copyrighted songs/videos without permission.  
Court’s Decision:  The Delhi High Court initially held Myspace liable for copyright infringement, 
but later recognized the i mportance of “safe harbour protection” for internet intermediaries under the 
IT Act.  
Step 1:  
User Reg istration   
Step 2: 
Submission of 
Application  
Step 3: 
Dairy Number Issuance  
Step 4: 
Copy Right Objection 
Handling  
Step 5: 
Objection Resolution  
Step 6: 
Application Scrutiny  
Step 7: 
Copyright Registration 
Certificate  

--- Page 10 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 10 of 16 
 Key Takeaway:  Online platforms are not directly liable for user -uploaded content if they act 
responsibly to remove infringing material.  
 
D. University of Oxford vs. Ramesh wari Photocopy Services (2016)  
Case Summary:  Oxford, Cambridge, and other publishers sued a Delhi University -affiliated 
photocopy shop for photocopying books and selling compilations to students.  
Court’s Decision:  The Delhi High Court ruled in favor of the  photocopy shop, holding that making 
course packs for educational purposes amounts to “fair dealing” under the Copyright Act.  
Key Takeaway:  Education and research get special protection under copyright law in India.  
 
4.2 Trademark  
4.2.1 Introduction  
A trade mark (popularly known as brand name in layman’s language) is a visual symbol which may 
be a word to indicate the source of the goods, a signature, name, device, label, numerals, or 
combination of  colours used, or services, or other articles of commerce to distinguish it from other 
similar goods or services  originating from another. It is a distinctive sign which identifies certain 
goods or services as those produced  or provided by a specific person or enterprise.  
A trade mark p rovides protection to the owner of the mark by ensuring the exclusive right to use it 
or to  authorize another to use the same in return for payment. The period of protection varies, but a 
trade mark  can be renewed indefinitely beyond the time limit on paym ent of additional fees. Trade 
mark protection is  enforced by the courts, which in most systems have the authority to block trade 
mark infringement.  
In a larger sense, trademarks promote initiative and enterprise worldwide by rewarding the owners 
of trade  marks with recognition and financial profit. Trade mark protection also hinders the efforts 
of unfair  competitors, such as counterfeiters, to use similar distinctive signs to market inferior or 
different products or  services. The system enables people with skill and enterprise to produce and 
market goods and services in  the fairest possible conditions, thereby facilitating international trade.  
4.2.2  Eligibility Criteria  
For goods/services to be legally classified as Trademark, they  need to pass the following conditions:  
i. Distin ctiveness - The goods and services for which the  protection is sought should possess enough 
uniqueness to  identify it as a Trademark. It must be capable of identifying the  source of goods or 
services in the target market.  
ii. Descriptiveness - The Trademark should not be describing the  description of the concerned goods 
or services. Descriptive  marks are unlikely to be protected under Trademark law.  
However, descriptive words may be registered if they acquire  ― secondary meaning , such as the 
brand name ‘Apple ’ is used  by a USA based multinational company that manufactures  electronic 
gadgets.  
iii. No Similarity to the prior marks - The mark should be unique  and should not be having 
similarity to the existing marks.  
 
 
 

--- Page 11 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 11 of 16 
 4.2.3 The Trade Marks Act 1999  
The salient features of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 includes  
(a) Providing for registration of trade mark for services, in addition to goods.  
(b) Amplification of definition of trade mark to include registration of shape of goods, 
packaging and  combination o f colours.  
(c) All 42-international  classification of goods and services (as earlier used) now applicable to 
India as  well.  
(d) Recognition of the concept of "well -known trademarks".  
(e) Increasing the period of registration and renewal of trade marks from  7 to 10 years, to bring 
it in conformity with the accepted international practice.  
(f) Widening the scope of infringement of trade marks. For instance, use of a registered trade 
mark as  trade name or as a part of a trade name or use of a mark which is ide ntical or 
deceptively similar to  a registered trade mark.  
(g) Creation of an "Intellectual property Appellate Board" for hearing appeals against orders 
and decisions of the Registrar of Trade Marks for speedy disposal of cases and rectification 
application s which hitherto lie before High Courts.  
(h) Criminal remedies in case of falsification of trade marks.  
(i) Recognition of use of trade mark by even an unregistered licensee.  
(j) Expeditious examination of a trade mark application on payment of five times the 
application fee.  
4.2.4 Classification of T rade Marks  
Trademarks are classified based on their nature, purpose, and distinctiveness. This helps in 
determining protection, registration, and enforcement under the Trade Marks Act, 1999.  
 
1. Product Marks : 
Applied to goods or products to identify their s ource.  
Example: Amul (for dairy products).  
2. Service Marks : 
Used to represent services instead of goods.  
Example: Airtel (telecommunication services).  
3. Collective Marks  
Owned by an association or group to distinguish members’ goods/services from ot hers.  
Example: CA logo (Institute of Chartered Accountants of India).  
4. Certification Marks : 
Indicate that the product/service meets standards of quality, origin, or material certified by 
an authority.  
Example: ISI mark, Agmark.  
5. Well -Known Trademarks  
Widely recognized by the public and enjoy strong protection even if not registered in a 
specific class.  
Example: Coca -Cola, Google.  

--- Page 12 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 12 of 16 
 6. Shape Marks  
Protect the 3D shape of goods or packaging if distin ctive.  
Example: Coca -Cola bottle shape.  
7. Sound Marks  
Trademarks in the form of a unique sound or tune.  
Example: Nokia tune.  
8. Color and Pattern Marks  
A specific combination of colors or patterns associated with a brand.  
Example: Cadbury purple.  
The classification of trademarks ensures systematic protection of different types of intellectual 
property, safeguarding both businesses and consumers. It also facilitates the process of registration 
and enforcement under Indian and internation al trademark systems.  
4.2.5 Trade Mark Rules 2017  
The Trade Mark Rules, 2017 have  been notified and have come into effect from March 6, 2017. 
These  Rules, which replace the erstwhile Trade Mark Rules 2002, will streamline and simplify the 
processing of  Trade Mark applications.  
Key Features:  
i. Simplification of  Process  – The number of trademark forms was reduced from  74 to 8 , 
making the filing process easier.  
ii. Online Filing Encouraged  – Lower fees for e -filing compared to physical filing to promote 
digital transactions.  
iii. Fee Structure  – 
a.  Higher fees for corporates,  firms, and companies.  
b. 50% concession  for start -ups, individuals, and small enterprises.  
iv. Sound Marks & Non -Traditional Marks  – Provision made to register  sound marks  (e.g., 
musical notes, jingles) through MP3 files.  
v. Expedited Processing  – Applicants can req uest fast-track examination  on payment of 
higher fees.  
vi. E-communication  – All communications from the Trademark Office are sent electronically, 
reducing delays.  
vii. Recognition of Well -Known Marks  – A clear procedure was introduced to apply for 
recognition of a  trademark as a  “well -known mark.”  
viii. Hearings via Video Conferencing  – Provision to conduct hearings through video 
conferencing for convenience and transparency.  
The Trade Mark Rules 2017 aim to make trademark registration in India  simpler, faster, more 
transparent, and startup -friendly , while also aligning with modern business practices like digital filing 
and protection of non -traditional marks.  
4.2.6 Types of Trade Marks Registered  in India  
Trademark can be a word that must be able to speak, spell and  remember. It is highly recommended 
that one should choose the  Trademark like invented word, created words, and unique  geographical 
name. One should refrain from Trademarks like  common geographical name, common personal 
name and the  praising words which describe the quality of goods, such as best,  perfect, super, etc. 
To ensure all these characteristics in a  Trademark, it is suggested to conduct a market survey to ensure 
if a similar mark is used in the market.  

--- Page 13 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 13 of 16 
  
Following are some examples of  the registerable Trademarks:  
• Any name including personal or surname of the applicant or  predecessor in business or the 
signature of the person e.g. the  Trademark ‘BAJAJ‘ is named after industrialist Mr. Jamnalal  
Bajaj.  
• A word having no relevance to the product/service s e.g.  Trademark ‘INDIA GATE‘ is being 
used for food grains and  allied products.  
• Letters or numerals or any combination thereof e.g. ’YAHOO‘  is the abbreviation of the 
phrase ‘Yet Another Hierarchical  Officious Oracle‘. It has now become a worldwide famous  
Trademark.  
Table. Some of the famous examples of Trademarks . 
 
4.2.7 Advantages  of Tarde Mark  Registration  
Trademark registration in India provides legal, commercial, and financial advantages, ensuring 
strong brand identity and pro tection.  
i. Legal Protection  – Provides the owner with exclusive rights to use the mark and protection 
against unauthorized use or infringement.  
ii. Exclusive Rights  – The registered owner can use the mark for the goods/services under the 
relevant class across In dia. 
iii. Brand Recognition & Goodwill  – Helps in creating a unique identity in the market and 
builds consumer trust.  
iv. Business Expansion  – A registered trademark allows easy licensing, franchising, or transfer 
of rights, enabling business growth.  
v. Deterrent to C ompetitors  – Prevents others from using a similar mark, thus avoiding market 
confusion.  
vi. Legal Evidence in Court  – Serves as prima facie evidence of ownership in case of disputes 
or infringement suits.  


--- Page 14 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 14 of 16 
 vii. Intangible Asset  – A trademark becomes a valuable asset  for the company, adding to its 
overall worth.  
viii. Global Registration Advantage  – A registered trademark in India can be used as a basis for 
registering in foreign countries under international treaties.  
ix. Perpetual Protection  – Registration is valid for 10 yea rs and can be renewed indefinitely, 
ensuring long -term security.  
x. Customer Loyalty  – A unique and protected mark helps attract and retain customers by 
signifying quality and reliability.  
4.2.8 Procedure of Registration of Trade Mark in India  
The process of trademark registration in India involves several stages. Here is a brief overview of the 
typical process:  
a. Trademark Search:  Conduct a thorough search to ensure that your proposed trademark is unique 
and not already registered or being used by others in a similar or related class of goods / services. 
This will help you assess potential conflicts and objections during the Tradem ark Registration 
process. For this, you need to determine the appropriate class or classes of goods or services for 
registering your Trademark, based on the Nice Classification system. The Nice Classification system 
categorizes goods and services into 45 c lasses, with each class representing a distinct category.  
b. Application Filing:  Prepare and file the trademark application with the Office of the Controller 
General of Patents, Designs and Trademarks (CGPDTM) in India. The application should include 
the n ecessary details, such as the applicant’s name, address, trademark representation, and a list of 
goods or services for which the mark will be used.  
c. Objection / Acceptance by the Trademark Examiner:  Once the application is filed, the 
trademark office exa mines it to assess compliance with legal requirements. They review factors such 
as distinctiveness, similarity to existing trademarks, and adherence to trademark laws. If any 
objections or discrepancies are found, the applicant may need to address them and  provide suitable 
responses within 30 days of receiving the objection. If the replies are satisfactory, the examiner will 
proceed to the next stage.  
d. Journal Publication:  If the trademark application passes the examination stage, it is published in 
the T rademarks Journal. This publication allows third parties to oppose the registration within a 
specified period of four months. If no opposition is raised, the application proceeds further to the last 
stage.  
e. Opposition:  However, if a third party raises op position during the time the mark is published in 
the Trademark Journal, the applicant will have to file an appropriate reply and counterevidence to 
the opposing party. If the opposing party does not find the reply satisfactory, then the Department 
shall c all a show cause hearing to resolve the issue.  
f. Trademark Registration : Upon successful completion of the publication stage, the trademark 
registration is granted, and a Certificate of Registration is issued. The registration is valid for ten 
years from the date of application and can be renewed indefinitely by paying the trademark renewal 
fees at regular intervals.  

--- Page 15 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 15 of 16 
  
Fig 4.2 Procedure for Trade Marks Registration in India . 
 
4.2.9 Trade Marks – Famous Case Examples  
a. Yahoo! Inc. v. Akash Arora & Anr. (1999)  
• First major case involving domain names  in India.  
• Court held that domain names function like trademarks → protection granted to Yahoo! 
against “yahooindia.com ”. 
b. T.V. Venugopal v. Ushodaya Enterprises Ltd. (2011)  
• “Eenadu” newspaper had strong goodwill. Another party used Eenadu for incense sticks.  
• Court ruled in favor of E enadu; goodwill and reputation extend beyond the original 
business.  
c. Cadila Health Care Ltd. v. Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (2001)  
• Dispute over trademarks Falcitab and Falcigo, both us ed for malaria medicines.  
• Supreme Court ruled in favor of strict protection in pharmaceutical trademarks, as confusion 
could endanger public health.  
d. Honda Motors Co. Ltd. v. Charanjit Singh (2003)  
• Defendant used the mark Honda  for pressur e cookers.  
• Delhi High Court ruled in favor of Honda, holding that use of a famous mark, even in 
unrelated goods, amounts to passing off . 
*** 


--- Page 16 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights ( 22RMI57)  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 16 of 16 
 Short Answer Type Questions  
1. List the FOUR  salient features of the Indian Copyright Act 1957 . 
2. Briefly explain the term “copyright” . 
3. How an author has been defined under the Copyright Act?  
4. List FOUR acts that are regarded as an infringement of Copyrights . 
5. List the criteria for Copyright.  
6. What is the distinction between trade mark and certification mark?  
7. Explain the term ‘ Well -known trade mark’.  
8. Give any 4 famous examples of Trade Marks.  
9. List the eligibility criteria for Trade Marks.  
10. Give the classification  of Trade Marks.  
 
Descriptive type Questions  
1. What is Copyright? Explain the classes of works for which copyright protection is available in 
India.  
2. How an author has been defined under the Copyright Act  1957?  Explain types of rights given to 
the Author.  
3. Briefly explain the salient features of the Indian Copyright Act 1957 . 
4. Briefly describe the systematic process for copyright registration in India with a flow chart.  
5. List any 5 works NOT  under the jurisdiction of Copyrights with one example for each.  
6. Enumerate the key features of the Trade Marks Rule , 2017 . 
7. Give the detailed classification  of Trade Marks with example  for each.  
8. Explain  the advantages  of Trade Mark registration in India . 
9. With a neat flowchart, explain the p rocedure of registration of Trade Mark in India . 
10. Discuss any 4 case examples related to Trade Mark in India.  
 
Discussion type Questions  
1. A YouTuber uses backgroun d music without permission in their videos. Apply the criteria of 
copyright to determine whether this constitutes infringement.  
2. Analyse a real -life copyright case (e.g., Eastern Book Company v. D.B. Modak) and explain how 
the court interpreted originality.  
3. Evaluate whether the current copyright law in India adequately addresses digital content such as 
memes, OTT content, and AI -generated works.  
4. Assume you are tasked with designing an awareness campaign for engineerin g students on 
“Avoiding Copyright Infringement in Academic Work.” Outline the key elements of your campaign.  
5. A start-up wants to register a unique sound as its brand identity. Apply the eligibility criteria and 
process of trademark registration to explain how they can protect it.  
6. The Cadila Health Care Ltd. v. Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd. case dealt with confusion in 
pharmaceutical trademarks. Analyse why stricter rules apply to healthcare -related marks.  
7. Evaluate th e advantages and limitations of registering a trademark in India compared to relying 
only on common law rights (passing off).  
8. Assume you are a consultant for a new engineering start -up. Create a step -by-step strategy for 
selecting, protecting, and enforcing a trademark that aligns with Indian trademark laws.  
*** 


================================================================================
FILE: 22RMI57 Module 5 Notes.pdf
================================================================================

--- Page 1 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
Module 5:  Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 1 of 11 
 Module -5 Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications ( 5 hours)  
Industrial Designs: Introduction, Eligibility criteria, Famous industrial designs, Features of 
Design Act 2000, Non-Protectable industrial designs in India, Procedure for Registration of 
Industrial Designs, Case examples . 
Geographical Indications (GIs): Introduction, Rights granted to holders, Popular GIs registered 
in India, salient features of Geographical Indications of Goods (R egistration & Protection) Act, 
1999 , Non-Registerable GI, Procedure for GI Registration , Case examples . 
5.1 Industrial Designs  
5.1.1 Introduction  
An industrial design relates to the “appearance of an article” i.e. how the product looks? and its 
design. It doesn’t protect its technical or functional features i.e. how a product works? Industrial 
designs are applied to a variety of products of industry  and handicraft. An industrial design consists 
of two -dimensional figures such as lines, color, patterns of an article as well it consists of three -
dimensional figures such as the shape of an article. For example, two -dimensional figures – the 
pattern of t extile, three -dimensional figure – round tail of a bike. There are various examples of 
industrial designs such as luxury items such as jewelry, medical equipment such as oximeters, 
electrical appliances, furniture, housewares, architectural designs, textil e designs, leisure items such 
as toys, graphical user interfaces such as navigation systems, etc.  
Industrial design play an important role in the trading of consumer goods or products. Industrial 
designs are what makes a product attractive and appealing; h ence, they add to the commercial value 
of a product and increase its marketability. Today, industrial design has become an integral part of 
consumer culture where rival articles compete for consumer's attention. It has become important 
therefore, to grant to an original industrial design adequate protection.  
When an industrial design is protected, this helps to ensure a fair return on investment. An effective 
system of protection also benefits consumers and the public at large, by promoting fair competition  
and honest trade practices.  
That apart, protecting industrial designs helps economic development, by encouraging creativity in 
the industrial and manufacturing sectors and contributes to the expansion of commercial activities 
and the export of national pr oducts. So, presently in India, the  Industrial Design laws are regulated 
by the Design Act of 2000.  
As per the Design Act 2000, Design means the features of shapes, patterns, configurations, 
ornaments, or composition of lines or colors applied to any artic le whether in 2 dimensional or 3 
dimensional or in both forms, by any means or industrial process, whether hand -operated, chemical, 
or mechanical, separate or combined, which is in the finished article address to and are attracted 
solely by the eye i.e. ta ngible in nature.  
5.1.2 Need for Protection of Industrial Designs  
Basically, a customer’s purchase choice, purchase decision, and opinion about a product is based on 
the product or article aesthetics, i.e. appearance such as patterns, shapes, looks, colors, combinations, 
etc. hence, industrial designs must be protected a nd registered in order to gain many benefits such as 
monetary gain, making a brand, etc. They also link a product with a particular quality standard based 
on the article’s appearance or product aesthetics. For an enterprise, the design of a product is an 
uncomplicated or the simplest way of differentiating one product from other competing products. 
Further, companies making imitation products usually copy the design of a product, to gain value in 

--- Page 2 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
Module 5:  Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 2 of 11 
 the market share. For business owners, a registration of an i ndustrial design may be a valuable 
business asset. The success of a product is usually influenced by its appearance in an aesthetic -driven 
consumer base, the looks of a fashionable product can often be equally or more important than its 
functionality. Henc e, it is important to protect the design from being duplicated. Obtaining exclusive 
rights to a product or an article with a particular appearance may result in a substantial return on the 
investment because it will allow you to prevent others from reprodu cing a popular design. Benefits 
of protection of designs are as follows;  
Is a revenue generator  
Protection of exclusive rights  
Return on investments  
Promotes brand value  
Facilitates marketing and commercialization  
Unique selling propositions  
Industrial des ign protection rewards and encourages creativity and innovation to benefit the 
consumers and the public at large and thus leads to more attractive and diversified products.  
Protecting industrial designs may benefit the manufacturing and industrial sector a s well as it injects 
into creativity it contributes to the development and enlargement of commercial activities, and build -
up the potential of exports of national products. So overall, industrial designs protection aids and 
benefits the owners, the consume rs, and the economy of the nation. As the protection of industrial 
designs is relatively simple and inexpensive to develop. Hence they are rationally reachable to small 
and medium undertakings and even to the individual artists and craftsmen in both indust rialized and 
developing countries.  
5.1.3 Eligibility Criteria for Industrial Design Registration in India  
Criterion  Explanation  
1. Novel / Original  The design must be new and not published anywhere in India or 
abroad before the filing date. It should not be in public domain prior 
to application.  
2. Applied to an Article  The design must be applied or capable of being applied to a physical 
article by any industrial process — mass production / repeated 
production.  
3. Features are only 
aesthetic  Design protection is ONLY for the external appearance — shape, 
configuration, pattern, ornamentation, composition of lines or 
colours visible in the finished articl e. Functional elements cannot 
be protected  under industrial design.  
4. Not contrary to public 
order or morality  The design should not contain obscene or offensive material.  
5. Not a mere 
mechanical device  Designs that are only mechanisms or purely functi onal devices (e.g., 
a key that works only based on functional slots) are not eligible.  
6. Capable of being 
judged solely by eye  The design must be visible during normal use of the product — i.e., 
a consumer must be able to see the design when using the article.  
7. Not covered under 
trademark or artistic 
work already protected  A design cannot be registered if it is: • a trademark • a property mark 
• an artistic work under Copyright Act • a layout design of 
semiconductor IC  

--- Page 3 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
Module 5:  Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 3 of 11 
 5.1.4 Famous Industrial Designs  
A. Famous International Industrial Designs  
Product  Company / 
Designer  Design Significance  
Coca -Cola Contour 
Bottle (1915)  Coca -Cola  One of the world’s most iconic bottle shapes, 
unique silhouette.  
Volkswagen Beetle  VW Distinct rounded profile with curved roof and 
fenders.  
Apple iPod (Original)  Apple / Jonathan 
Ive Minimalist white front + chrome back → new 
portable music aesthetic.  
Dyson Cyclone Vacuum 
Cleaner  Dyson  Transparent dust bin + cyclonic form.  
Eames Lounge Chair  Charles & Ray 
Eames  Classic molded plywood + leather chair design.  
Tiffany Blue Box  Tiffany & Co.  Packaging as a design identity (registered 
design).  
Zippo Lighter Case  Zippo  Rectangular metal case with flip -top aesthetic.  
Nespresso Coffee 
Capsule  Nestlé Nespresso  Conical frustums designed for machine 
readability.  
B. Famous Indian Industrial Designs  
Product  Company / 
Designer  Design Significance  
TATA Nano (Exterior 
Shape)  Tata Motors  Design registered for compact city car with 
unique proportions.  
Amul Butter Packaging  Amul  Distinct cartoon design + typography used 
consistently for decades.  
Aranmula Kannadi (Metal 
Mirror shape variants)  Kerala artisans  Unique elliptical / circular decorative forms 
(form — not the manufacturing secret).  
Havells decorative ceiling 
fans Havells  Premium fan designs (many registered) e.g., 
Stealth series.  
Milton / Cello Insulated 
Casseroles  Milton/Cello  Specific lid + handle forms that are registered 
designs.  
Prestige Pressure Cooker 
Outer Lid Forms  TTK Prestige  Several distinctive lid + body shapes 
registered as designs.  
5.1.5 Key  Features of the Designs Act, 2000  
The Designs Act, 2000 modernised Indian design law by clarifying what a design is, ensuring 
novelty, aligning with TRIPS, setting 10+5 years protection, adopting Locarno classification, and 
providing stronger enforcement and cancellation provisions.  
1. Compliance with TRIPS Agreement  
– The Act was updated to align with global IP standards, especiall y TRIPS (WTO).  

--- Page 4 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
Module 5:  Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 4 of 11 
 2. Design definition clarified  
– Protection only for aesthetic  features (shape, configuration, pattern, ornament, lines or 
colours) applied to an article, judged solely by the eye.  
– Functional / technical features are excluded.  
3. Novelty and Ori ginality requirement  
– A design must be new or original and not previously published or disclosed anywhere 
before filing.  
4. Classification system  
– Adoption of Locarno Classification  (international classification of designs).  
5. Term of protection  
– 10 years fr om date of registration + extendable for further 5 years  → maximum 15 
years . 
6. Provision for priority claim  
– Applicant from convention countries can claim priority if filed within prescribed time 
(usually 6 months).  
7. Provision for cancellation  
– Any person c an file for cancellation of a registered design on specific legal grounds (e.g., 
not novel).  
8. Publication of registered designs  
– Registrar shall publish the registered designs in the official journal.  
9. Penalties for piracy of design  
– Civil remedies provide d for infringement / piracy of a registered design.  
– Monetary compensation can be claimed.  
10. No overlap with trademarks & copyrights  
– A design cannot be registered if it is:  
• trademark or property mark  
• artistic work under Copyright Act  
• layout design o f semiconductor IC  
5.1.6  Non- Registrable Designs  (Non-Protectable  Designs)  
• Any Industrial Design which is against public moral values.  
• Industrial Designs including flags, emblems or signs of any country.  
• Industrial Designs of integrated circuits.  
• Any Design describing the ‘process of making of an article ’. 
• Industrial Designs of – books, calendars, certificates, forms and other documents, 
dressmaking patterns, greeting cards, leaflets, maps and plan cards, postcards, stamps, 
medals.  
• The artistic work defined under Section 2(c) of the Copyright Act, 1957 is not a subject matter 
for registration for Industrial Designs, such as:  
• Paintings, sculptures, drawings including a diagram, map, chart or plan.  
• Photographs and work of architecture.  
• Any other work related to artistic craftsmanship.  
• Industrial Designs does not include any Trademark (The Designs Act, 2000).  
5.1.7 Procedure for Registration of Designs  
Once the applicant is satisfied that his Design is novel and significantly distinguishable  from other 
Designs, he can proceed with filing an application for Design registration. The application for 
registration of Design can be filed by an individual, small entity, institution, organization and  
industry. The application may be filed through a professional patent agent or legal practitioner. If the 

--- Page 5 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
Module 5:  Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 5 of 11 
 applicant is not a resident of India, an agent residing in India has to be employed for this purpose. 
The applicant submits the registration applicatio n at the Design Office Deputy Controller of Patents 
& Designs, Patent Office, Intellectual Property Office Building, CP -2 Sector V, Salt Lake City, 
Kolkata -700091.  
The flowchart of the registration process is illustrated  in Figure 5.1 .  
 
Figure.  5.1  Flow chart for the process of Design registration.  
After the application has been filed, an officer (examiner) analyses the application for qualifying the 
minimum standards laid down for eligibility criteria for registration. In case of any query, the same 
is sent to the applicant and he is supposed to respond within 6 months from the objection raised. Once 
the objections are removed, the application is accepted for registration. The particulars of the 
application, along with the representation of the article, a re published in the Official Journal of Patent 
Office (http://www.ipindia.nic.in/journal -patents.htm). If no objection is received from the public, 
the Design is registered. After the registration of the Design, the applicant becomes the proprietor of 
the Design and is conferred with the exclusive right to apply that Design to the article belonging to 
the class in which it is registered. The applicant puts up a request for issuance of a certificate of 
registration (for an Industrial Design).  
 
5.1.8 Infringement of Industrial Designs and Remedies  
A. Infringement of Industrial Designs  
The owner of a registered design right may exclusively work on the registered design or any design 
similar to it. If a third party manufactures or sells, etc., the regist ered design or any similar design for 
commercial purposes (meaning that private or domestic use is excluded) and if the third party is not 


--- Page 6 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
Module 5:  Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 6 of 11 
 licensed to do so by the owner of the registered design right, such activity constitutes a design right 
infringement.  
B. Remedies for Design Infringement  
The Design Act, 2000, under Section 22(2), provides for the liabilities of the infringer of a Design, 
which are the remedies available impliedly to the registered proprietor or owner of the design. The 
liability of the infringing party as provided in Section 22 of the Design Act, 2000, in case of Design 
Infringement in India is as follows:  
As per Section 22(2)(a) of the Design Act, 2000, the infringer is required to pay a sum not exceeding 
25,000 Rupees for every contrav ention or breach recoverable as a contract debt to the registered 
owner or proprietor. The total sum of such amount, which is recoverable for one design, should not 
exceed 50,000 Rupees.  
As per Section 22(2)(b) of the Design Act, 2000, the registered owner  or proprietor can choose to 
bring a suit for recovery of the damages, and can also plead for an injunction against repetition. In 
such a case, the infringing party is liable to pay such an amount as the court awards and is also 
restricted by an injunction , respectively.  
 
5.1.9 Industrial Designs Case Examples : 
1. Crocs Inc. USA v. Bata India Ltd. and O thers. 
Judgment date: 24th January 2019.  
Facts: In this case, Crocs filed a suit against Bata for infringement of its registered sandal designs 
and passing off its trademarks in the shape and configuration of its footwear. As the design 
registration was a prima facie liability to be cancelled  based on prior publication and new, the 
Division Bench of the Delhi High Court did not interfere with the single judge’s order denying the 
interim injunction to Crocs. Before filing the date of the design application, the designs were issued 
on the Crocs webs ite.  
Judgments: The court held that based on the previous publication the validity of design registration 
was questionable. It further added that the designs claimed was only modifications of pre -existing 
designs, the court stated that the novelty or orig inality of the designs was also questionable. In this 
case, The Delhi High Court also sustained the grant of legal costs to the defendants. Furthermore, the 
Court ordered the single judge to hear the passing of cases along with registered design cases as t hey 
were based on the same cause of action.  
2. Ritika Private limited V. Biba Apparels Private Limited  
Judgment date: 23rd March 2016  
Facts: In this case, Plaintiff is a famous boutique apparel designer brand in India. The defendant is 
also a famous design er and manufacturer in India.  
Plaintiff has filed the suit for seeking an injunction against the defendant from reproducing, printing, 
publishing, selling or offering, etc. of prints or garments which are a duplication of the Plaintiff’s 
work.  
Arguments: Defendant argued that under the Design Act, 2000 the designs of the plaintiff have not 
been registered. Defendant further added that by an industrial process, the plaintiff’s designs have 
been reproduced more than fifty times. Hence, there wouldn’t be any infringement of copyright. 

--- Page 7 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
Module 5:  Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 7 of 11 
 Therefore, Plaintiff claimed to be the first owner of the designs manufactured and also claimed the 
trade secrets violation by ex -employees.  
According to Section 15 (2) of the Copyright Act, 1957 as there was no registration and the design 
has been reproduced more than fifty (50) times by an industrial process, the plaintiff’s designs cease 
to exist.  
The court stated that there was no copyright infringement on the part of the defendant as the designs 
of the plaint iff were not registered under the Design Act, 2000. Therefore, this judgment proves that 
registration of Designs is necessary in order to protect your design from duplication of work. Hence, 
the owner of a design loses all the benefits and rights relating to the designs of an article.  
 
 
5.2 Geographical Indications  
5.2.1 Introduction  
A Geographical Indication (GI) is a sign used on goods that have a specific geographical origin and 
possess qualities, reputation or characteristics that are essentially attributable to that place of origin. 
Most commonly, a geographical indication includes the name of the place of origin of the goods. 
Agricultural products typically have qualities that derive from their place of production and are 
influenced b y specific local factors, such as climate and soil.  
Geographical indications are protected in accordance with international treaties and national laws. 
Under the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), there is no 
obliga tion for other countries to extend reciprocal protection unless a geographical indication is 
protected in the country of its origin. India, as a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO), 
enacted the Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration & Pro tection) Act, 1999.  
Some commodities that have been recently granted the status of a Geographical Indication by the  
Government of India include Gir Kesar Mango, Bhalia wheat, Kinhal Toys, Nashik Valley wine, 
Monsoon  Malabar Arabica Coffee, Malabar Pepper, Alleppy Green Cardamom and Nilgiris 
Orthodox Tea. Other  examples include Darjeeling Tea, Mysore Silk, Paithani Sarees, Kota Masuria, 
Kolhapuri Chappals, Bikaneri  Bhujia and Agra Petha.  
5.2.2 Rights Granted to the Holders  
• Right to grant the license to others  - The holder has the right to gift, sell, transfer/grant a 
license, mortgage or enter into any other arrangement for consideration regarding their 
product. A license or assignment must be given in written and registered with the Registrar 
of GI, for  it to be valid and legitimate.  
• Right to sue  - The holder of GI has the right to use and take legal action against a person who 
uses the product without his consent.  
• Right to exploit  - The holder of GI can authorize users with exclusive right to use goods for 
which the GI is registered.  
• Right to get reliefs  - Registered proprietors and authorized users have the right to obtain 
relief concerning the violation of such GI products  
 
 
 

--- Page 8 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
Module 5:  Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 8 of 11 
 5.2.3 Popular GIs in India  
 
GI Name  Type  State / Region  
Darjeeling Tea  Agricultural (Tea)  West Bengal  
Basmati Rice  Agricultural (Rice)  Punjab, Haryana, Uttarakhand, 
Himachal Pradesh, Delhi, UP, J&K  
Banarasi Saree & Brocade  Handicraft/Textile  Uttar Pradesh  
Kanchipuram Silk Saree  Handicraft/Textile  Tamil Nadu  
Mysore Silk  Handicraft/Textile  Karnataka  
Aranmula Kannadi  Handicraft/Metal Mirror  Kerala  
Thanjavur Paintings  Handicraft/Art  Tamil Nadu  
Blue Pottery of Jaipur  Handicraft/Pottery  Rajasthan  
Makrana Marble  Natural Stone  Rajasthan  
Channapatna Toys  Handicraft  Karnataka  
Solapur Chaddar  Handicraft/Textile  Maharashtra  
Kolhapuri Chappal  Handicraft/Footwear  Maharashtra, Karnataka  
Nagpur Orange  Agricultural (Fruit)  Maharashtra  
Alphonso Mango  Agricultural (Fruit)  Maharashtra  
Marayoor Jaggery  Agricultural (Jaggery)  Kerala  
Coorg Arabica Coffee  Agricultural (Coffee)  Karnataka  
Naga Mircha (Naga Chilli)  Agricultural (Spice)  Nagaland  
Assam Orthodox Tea  Agricultural (Tea)  Assam  
 
5.2.4 Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration & Protection) Act, 1999  
The salient features of Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration & Protection) Act, 1999 are 
as under:  
• Defines Geographical Indication (GI)  as a sign identifying goods from a specific 
geographical region.  
• The quality, reputation, or characteristics  of the goods must be essentially linked to their 
place of origin.  
• The Act covers agricultural, natural, and manufactur ed goods , including handicrafts, 
textiles, and food items.  
• Only producer groups, associations, or government bodies  can apply for GI registration —
not individuals.  
• The GI Registry is located in Chennai , under the control of the Registrar of GIs.  
• Application  includes details  such as geographical area, proof of origin, method of 
production, and uniqueness.  
• Registration grants exclusive rights  to use the GI to the registered proprietor and authorized 
users.  
• Protection period is 10 years , and it can be renewed i ndefinitely for further 10 -year periods.  
• Prohibits  registration of GIs that are generic, deceptive, hurt religious sentiments, or cause 
confusion.  

--- Page 9 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
Module 5:  Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 9 of 11 
 • Infringement  occurs when unauthorized persons use the GI name, leading to misleading 
consumers or unfair comp etition.  
• Penalties include fines and imprisonment  for misuse or fraudulent use of registered GIs.  
• A registered GI cannot be assigned, transferred, mortgaged, or licensed , preserving 
community ownership and heritage.  
 
5.2.5 Procedure for Registration of Geographical Indications  
Steps applicable for registration as authorised user are - 
1. Filing of an application  
2. Preliminary Scrutiny and exam  
3. Issue of Show cause notice  
4. Advertisement  
5. Opposition for registration  
6. Registration  
The pr ocedure is illustrated in the flow chart  Figure 5.2 . 
 
 
Note: IPAB - Intellectual Property Appellate Board (IPAB)  
  
Figure. 5.2.   Flow chart for registration process of Geographical Indications in India.  
 
5.2.6 Non -Registrable GIs  
For GI registration, the indications must fall within the scope of  section 2(1) (e) of GI Act, 1999. 
Being so, it has to also satisfy the  provisions of Section 9, which prohibits registration of a GI  
mentioned below:  


--- Page 10 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
Module 5:  Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 10 of 11 
 • The use of which would be likely to deceive or cause confusion.  
• The use of which would be contrary to any law.  
• Which comprises or contains scandalous or obscene matter.  
• Which comprises or contains any matter likely to hurt the sentiments of society.  
• Religious susceptibilities of any class or section of the citizens of India.  
• Which are determined to be generic names or indications of goods and are, therefore, not or 
ceased to be protected in their country of origin or which have fallen into disuse in that  
country.  
 
5.2.7 Case Examples  
a. Banglar Rasogolla Vs. Odisha Rasa gola - Rasagolas is a very popular dessert in India. It is 
thought  to have originated in the eastern part of India. In November 2017, the West Bengal State 
Food Processing and Horticulture Development Corporation Limited registered  ‘Banglar Rasogolla ’ 
as a GI. However, the legal battle for GI registration started when objections to this GI registration 
were lodged by the State of  Odisha, claiming that Rasagolas originated at Jagannath temple in Puri, 
Odisha. An application was filed in High Court in Februa ry 2018 to remove the registration of GI 
status of ‘Banglar Rasogolla ’. Meanwhile, in July 2018 , Odisha Rasagola‘ was also granted GI tag 
by the GI Registry, GoI. As per the court verdict,  
a) ‘Rasogolla / Rasagola ’ is a general term, which any person can use in his trade and business.  
b) The words ‘Odisha Rasagola ’ and ‘Benglar Rasogolla ’ can only be used by authorized users under 
the law.  
Hence, neither Bengal nor Odisha has a monopoly on the word Rasagola. However, no person or 
society or company can use the label ‘Banglar Rasogolla ’ or ‘Odisha Rasagola ’, without written 
consent from the authorized users.  
b. Darjeeling Tea vs. Overseas Counterfeit Sellers  
• Darjeeling Tea was one of the first GIs registered in  India (2004) . 
• The Tea Board of India fought several cases abroad where sellers were falsely branding 
ordinary tea as “Darjeeling Tea.”  
• Courts in the UK and France  recognized the GI and banned counterfeit labeling, 
strengthening India’s GI protection inter nationally.  
c. Basmati Rice Patent Dispute: India vs. U.S. Company  
• A U.S. -based company RiceTec  tried to patent certain varieties under the name “Basmati.”  
• India challenged the claim, arguing “Basmati” is a traditional GI of the Indo -Gangetic region.  
• RiceTec withdrew major claims, and the case helped strengthen India’s move to get Basmati 
recognized as a GI.  
 
 

--- Page 11 ---
Subject: Research Methodology and Intellectual Property Rights (2 2RMI57)  
Module 5:  Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications  
St Joseph Engineering College Mangaluru (Autonomous Institution under VTU Belagavi)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Page 11 of 11 
 Short Answer Type Questions  
1. State the meaning of “Design” as per the Design Act 2000.  
2. List any 4 famous Industrial Design s in India.  
3. What do you mean by Non -registrable Design s?  
4. What are the rights granted to h olders in case o f Geographical Indications  in India.  
5.  List out the 4 examples of Indian Geographical Indications.  
6. List 4 benefits of Geographical Indications.  
 
Descriptive Type Questions  
1. What is an Industrial Design? Discuss the need for protection of Industrial Designs as IP in 
India.  
2. List and explain the Eligibility Criteria for Industrial Design Registration in India .  
3. List the key features of the Indian Design Act 200 0.  
4. Explain the process of Design registration in India with the help of flow chart.  
5. Discuss briefly registrable and non -registrable designs.  
6. Discuss any two Industrial Designs case examples .  
7. Wha t is a geographical indication? List the salient features of the Geographical Indications of 
Goods (Registration & Protection) Act, 1999.  
8. Discuss the procedure for registration of geographical indications with a neat flow chart.  
9. Discuss any two Geographical Indications Case Examples . 
10. Compare Geographical Indications with trademarks and copyrights. Highlight differences in 
protection scope, ownership, duration, purpose, and enforcement mechanisms.  
 
Discussion Type Questions  
1. Analyze how industrial design protection benefits manufacturers, designers, and consumers. 
Illustrate with examples of industries where design plays a significant role.  
2. Explain the concept of industrial design as a form of intellectual property. Discuss its importance 
in product appeal, market competitiveness, and consumer choice.  
3. Propose a complete registration strategy for a new consumer product of your choice (e.g., a water 
bottle, furniture design,  or gadget). Include novelty justification, documentation, drawings, and 
expected challenges during examination.  
4. Analyze how the eligibility criteria unde r the Designs Act, 2000 ensure the protection of truly 
original and novel industrial designs. Support your answer with suitable examples.  
5. Evaluate the role of GI registration in enhancing rural development and traditional craftsmanship. 
Provide examples showing improvements in livelihood, brandi ng, and export potential.  
6. Explain with examples why certain goods or names are prohi bited from GI registration.  
7. Discuss how GIs play their importa nt role  in protecting traditional knowledge, preserving regional 
identity, and promoting rural economic development.  
8. Analyze how the rights granted to GI holders help curb counterfeiting and unfair competition in 
the Indian market. Support your answer with relevant examples of registered GIs.  
 
 
*** 
 
